TYPEE

A ROMANCE OF THE SOUTH SEAS


By Herman Melville




PREFACE

More than three years have elapsed since the occurrence of the events
recorded in this volume. The interval, with the exception of the last
few months, has been chiefly spent by the author tossing about on
the wide ocean. Sailors are the only class of men who now-a-days see
anything like stirring adventure; and many things which to fire-side
people appear strange and romantic, to them seem as common-place as a
jacket out at elbows. Yet, notwithstanding the familiarity of sailors
with all sorts of curious adventure, the incidents recorded in the
following pages have often served, when ‘spun as a yarn,’ not only to
relieve the weariness of many a night-watch at sea, but to excite the
warmest sympathies of the author’s shipmates. He has been, therefore,
led to think that his story could scarcely fail to interest those who
are less familiar than the sailor with a life of adventure.

In his account of the singular and interesting people among whom he was
thrown, it will be observed that he chiefly treats of their more obvious
peculiarities; and, in describing their customs, refrains in most cases
from entering into explanations concerning their origin and purposes.
As writers of travels among barbarous communities are generally very
diffuse on these subjects, he deems it right to advert to what may be
considered a culpable omission. No one can be more sensible than the
author of his deficiencies in this and many other respects; but when the
very peculiar circumstances in which he was placed are understood, he
feels assured that all these omissions will be excused.

In very many published narratives no little degree of attention is
bestowed upon dates; but as the author lost all knowledge of the days of
the week, during the occurrence of the scenes herein related, he hopes
that the reader will charitably pass over his shortcomings in this
particular.

In the Polynesian words used in this volume,--except in those cases
where the spelling has been previously determined by others,--that form
of orthography has been employed, which might be supposed most easily
to convey their sound to a stranger. In several works descriptive of the
islands in the Pacific, many of the most beautiful combinations of
vocal sounds have been altogether lost to the ear of the reader by an
over-attention to the ordinary rules of spelling.

There are a few passages in the ensuing chapters which may be thought
to bear rather hard upon a reverend order of men, the account of whose
proceedings in different quarters of the globe--transmitted to us
through their own hands--very generally, and often very deservedly,
receives high commendation. Such passages will be found, however, to
be based upon facts admitting of no contradiction, and which have come
immediately under the writer’s cognizance. The conclusions deduced from
these facts are unavoidable, and in stating them the author has been
influenced by no feeling of animosity, either to the individuals
themselves, or to that glorious cause which has not always been served
by the proceedings of some of its advocates.

The great interest with which the important events lately occurring
at the Sandwich, Marquesas, and Society Islands, have been regarded in
America and England, and indeed throughout the world, will, he trusts,
justify a few otherwise unwarrantable digressions.

There are some things related in the narrative which will be sure to
appear strange, or perhaps entirely incomprehensible, to the reader;
but they cannot appear more so to him than they did to the author at the
time. He has stated such matters just as they occurred, and leaves every
one to form his own opinion concerning them; trusting that his anxious
desire to speak the unvarnished truth will gain for him the confidence
of his readers. 1846.




INTRODUCTION TO THE EDITION OF 1892

By Arthur Stedman

Of the trinity of American authors whose births made the year 1819 a
notable one in our literary history,--Lowell, Whitman, and Melville,--it
is interesting to observe that the two latter were both descended, on
the fathers’ and mothers’ sides respectively, from have families of
British New England and Dutch New York extraction. Whitman and Van
Velsor, Melville and Gansevoort, were the several combinations which
produced these men; and it is easy to trace in the life and character
of each author the qualities derived from his joint ancestry. Here,
however, the resemblance ceases, for Whitman’s forebears, while worthy
country people of good descent, were not prominent in public or private
life. Melville, on the other hand, was of distinctly patrician birth,
his paternal and maternal grandfathers having been leading characters in
the Revolutionary War; their descendants still maintaining a dignified
social position.

Allan Melville, great-grandfather of Herman Melville, removed from
Scotland to America in 1748, and established himself as a merchant
in Boston. His son, Major Thomas Melville, was a leader in the famous
‘Boston Tea Party’ of 1773 and afterwards became an officer in the
Continental Army. He is reported to have been a Conservative in all
matters except his opposition to unjust taxation, and he wore the
old-fashioned cocked hat and knee-breeches until his death, in 1832,
thus becoming the original of Doctor Holmes’s poem, ‘The Last Leaf’.
Major Melville’s son Allan, the father of Herman, was an importing
merchant,--first in Boston, and later in New York. He was a man of much
culture, and was an extensive traveller for his time. He married Maria
Gansevoort, daughter of General Peter Gansevoort, best known as ‘the
hero of Fort Stanwix.’ This fort was situated on the present site of
Rome, N.Y.; and there Gansevoort, with a small body of men, held in
check reinforcements on their way to join Burgoyne, until the disastrous
ending of the latter’s campaign of 1777 was insured. The Gansevoorts, it
should be said, were at that time and subsequently residents of Albany,
N.Y.

Herman Melville was born in New York on August 1,1819, and received
his early education in that city. There he imbibed his first love of
adventure, listening, as he says in ‘Redburn,’ while his father ‘of
winter evenings, by the well-remembered sea-coal fire in old Greenwich
Street, used to tell my brother and me of the monstrous waves at sea,
mountain high, of the masts bending like twigs, and all about Havre
and Liverpool.’ The death of his father in reduced circumstances
necessitated the removal of his mother and the family of eight brothers
and sisters to the village of Lansingburg, on the Hudson River. There
Herman remained until 1835, when he attended the Albany Classical School
for some months. Dr. Charles E. West, the well-known Brooklyn educator,
was then in charge of the school, and remembers the lad’s deftness in
English composition, and his struggles with mathematics.

The following year was passed at Pittsfield, Mass., where he engaged in
work on his uncle’s farm, long known as the ‘Van Schaack place.’ This
uncle was Thomas Melville, president of the Berkshire Agricultural
Society, and a successful gentleman farmer.

Herman’s roving disposition, and a desire to support himself
independently of family assistance, soon led him to ship as cabin boy
in a New York vessel bound for Liverpool. He made the voyage, visited
London, and returned in the same ship. ‘Redburn: His First Voyage,’
published in 1849, is partly founded on the experiences of this trip,
which was undertaken with the full consent of his relatives, and which
seems to have satisfied his nautical ambition for a time. As told in the
book, Melville met with more than the usual hardships of a sailor-boy’s
first venture. It does not seem difficult in ‘Redburn’ to separate the
author’s actual experiences from those invented by him, this being the
case in some of his other writings.

A good part of the succeeding three years, from 1837 to 1840, was
occupied with school-teaching. While so engaged at Greenbush, now
East Albany, N.Y., he received the munificent salary of ‘six dollars
a quarter and board.’ He taught for one term at Pittsfield, Mass.,
‘boarding around’ with the families of his pupils, in true American
fashion, and easily suppressing, on one memorable occasion, the efforts
of his larger scholars to inaugurate a rebellion by physical force.

I fancy that it was the reading of Richard Henry Dana’s ‘Two Years
Before the Mast’ which revived the spirit of adventure in Melville’s
breast. That book was published in 1840, and was at once talked of
everywhere. Melville must have read it at the time, mindful of his
own experience as a sailor. At any rate, he once more signed a ship’s
articles, and on January 1, 1841, sailed from New Bedford harbour in the
whaler Acushnet, bound for the Pacific Ocean and the sperm fishery.
He has left very little direct information as to the events of this
eighteen months’ cruise, although his whaling romance, ‘Moby Dick; or,
the Whale,’ probably gives many pictures of life on board the Acushnet.
In the present volume he confines himself to a general account of
the captain’s bad treatment of the crew, and of his non-fulfilment of
agreements. Under these considerations, Melville decided to abandon the
vessel on reaching the Marquesas Islands; and the narrative of ‘Typee’
begins at this point. However, he always recognised the immense
influence the voyage had had upon his career, and in regard to its
results has said in ‘Moby Dick,’--

‘If I shall ever deserve any real repute in that small but high hushed
world which I might not be unreasonably ambitious of; if hereafter I
shall do anything that on the whole a man might rather have done than to
have left undone... then here I prospectively ascribe all the honour
and the glory to whaling; for a whale-ship was my Yale College and my
Harvard.’

The record, then, of Melville’s escape from the Dolly, otherwise the
Acushnet, the sojourn of his companion Toby and himself in the Typee
Valley on the island of Nukuheva, Toby’s mysterious disappearance, and
Melville’s own escape, is fully given in the succeeding pages; and rash
indeed would he be who would enter into a descriptive contest with these
inimitable pictures of aboriginal life in the ‘Happy Valley.’ So great
an interest has always centred in the character of Toby, whose actual
existence has been questioned, that I am glad to be able to declare him
an authentic personage, by name Richard T. Greene. He was enabled to
discover himself again to Mr. Melville through the publication of the
present volume, and their acquaintance was renewed, lasting for quite
a long period. I have seen his portrait,--a rare old daguerrotype,--and
some of his letters to our author. One of his children was named for the
latter, but Mr. Melville lost trace of him in recent years.

With the author’s rescue from what Dr. T. M. Coan has styled his
‘anxious paradise,’ ‘Typee’ ends, and its sequel, ‘Omoo,’ begins. Here,
again, it seems wisest to leave the remaining adventures in the South
Seas to the reader’s own discovery, simply stating that, after a sojourn
at the Society Islands, Melville shipped for Honolulu. There he remained
for four months, employed as a clerk. He joined the crew of the American
frigate United States, which reached Boston, stopping on the way at one
of the Peruvian ports, in October of 1844. Once more was a narrative
of his experiences to be preserved in ‘White Jacket; or, the World in
a Man-of-War.’ Thus, of Melville’s four most important books, three,
‘Typee,’ ‘Omoo,’ and ‘White-Jacket,’ are directly auto biographical,
and ‘Moby Dick’ is partially so; while the less important ‘Redburn’ is
between the two classes in this respect. Melville’s other prose works,
as will be shown, were, with some exceptions, unsuccessful efforts at
creative romance.

Whether our author entered on his whaling adventures in the South Seas
with a determination to make them available for literary purposes, may
never be certainly known. There was no such elaborate announcement or
advance preparation as in some later cases. I am inclined to believe
that the literary prospect was an after-thought, and that this insured
a freshness and enthusiasm of style not otherwise to be attained.
Returning to his mother’s home at Lansingburg, Melville soon began the
writing of ‘Typee,’ which was completed by the autumn of 1845. Shortly
after this his older brother, Gansevoort Melville, sailed for England
as secretary of legation to Ambassador McLane, and the manuscript was
intrusted to Gansevoort for submission to John Murray. Its immediate
acceptance and publication followed in 1846. ‘Typee’ was dedicated to
Chief Justice Lemuel Shaw of Massachusetts, an old friendship between
the author’s family and that of Justice Shaw having been renewed about
this time. Mr. Melville became engaged to Miss Elizabeth Shaw, the only
daughter of the Chief Justice, and their marriage followed on August 4,
1847, in Boston.

The wanderings of our nautical Othello were thus brought to a
conclusion. Mr. and Mrs. Melville resided in New York City until 1850,
when they purchased a farmhouse at Pittsfield, their farm adjoining that
formerly owned by Mr. Melville’s uncle, which had been inherited by the
latter’s son. The new place was named ‘Arrow Head,’ from the numerous
Indian antiquities found in the neighbourhood. The house was so situated
as to command an uninterrupted view of Greylock Mountain and the
adjacent hills. Here Melville remained for thirteen years, occupied
with his writing, and managing his farm. An article in Putnam’s Monthly
entitled ‘I and My Chimney,’ another called ‘October Mountain,’ and the
introduction to the ‘Piazza Tales,’ present faithful pictures of Arrow
Head and its surroundings. In a letter to Nathaniel Hawthorne, given
in ‘Nathaniel Hawthorne and His Wife,’ his daily life is set forth. The
letter is dated June 1, 1851.

‘Since you have been here I have been building some shanties of houses
(connected with the old one), and likewise some shanties of chapters and
essays. I have been ploughing and sowing and raising and printing and
praying, and now begin to come out upon a less bristling time, and to
enjoy the calm prospect of things from a fair piazza at the north of the
old farmhouse here. Not entirely yet, though, am I without something to
be urgent with. The ‘Whale’ is only half through the press; for, wearied
with the long delays of the printers, and disgusted with the heat
and dust of the Babylonish brick-kiln of New York, I came back to the
country to feel the grass, and end the book reclining on it, if I may.’

Mr. Hawthorne, who was then living in the red cottage at Lenox, had
a week at Arrow Head with his daughter Una the previous spring. It is
recorded that the friends ‘spent most of the time in the barn, bathing
in the early spring sunshine, which streamed through the open doors,
and talking philosophy.’ According to Mr. J. E. A. Smith’s volume on the
Berkshire Hills, these gentlemen, both reserved in nature, though near
neighbours and often in the same company, were inclined to be shy of
each other, partly, perhaps, through the knowledge that Melville had
written a very appreciative review of ‘Mosses from an Old Manse’ for the
New York Literary World, edited by their mutual friends, the Duyckincks.
‘But one day,’ writes Mr. Smith, ‘it chanced that when they were out on
a picnic excursion, the two were compelled by a thundershower to take
shelter in a narrow recess of the rocks of Monument Mountain. Two hours
of this enforced intercourse settled the matter. They learned so much
of each other’s character,... that the most intimate friendship for
the future was inevitable.’ A passage in Hawthorne’s ‘Wonder Book’
is noteworthy as describing the number of literary neighbours in
Berkshire:--

‘For my part, I wish I had Pegasus here at this moment,’ said the
student. ‘I would mount him forthwith, and gallop about the country
within a circumference of a few miles, making literary calls on my
brother authors. Dr. Dewey would be within ray reach, at the foot of
the Taconic. In Stockbridge, yonder, is Mr. James [G. P. R. James],
conspicuous to all the world on his mountain-pile of history and
romance. Longfellow, I believe, is not yet at the Oxbow, else the winged
horse would neigh at him. But here in Lenox I should find our most
truthful novelist [Miss Sedgwick], who has made the scenery and life
of Berkshire all her own. On the hither side of Pittsfield sits Herman
Melville, shaping out the gigantic conception of his ‘White Whale,’
while the gigantic shadow of Greylock looms upon him from his study
window. Another bound of my flying steed would bring me to the door of
Holmes, whom I mention last, because Pegasus would certainly unseat me
the next minute, and claim the poet as his rider.’

While at Pittsfield, Mr. Melville was induced to enter the lecture
field. From 1857 to 1860 he filled many engagements in the lyceums,
chiefly speaking of his adventures in the South Seas. He lectured
in cities as widely apart as Montreal, Chicago, Baltimore, and San
Francisco, sailing to the last-named place in 1860, by way of Cape
Horn, on the Meteor, commanded, by his younger brother, Captain Thomas
Melville, afterward governor of the ‘Sailor’s Snug Harbor’ at Staten
Island, N.Y. Besides his voyage to San Francisco, he had, in 1849 and
1856, visited England, the Continent, and the Holy Land, partly to
superintend the publication of English editions of his works, and partly
for recreation.

A pronounced feature of Melville’s character was his unwillingness to
speak of himself, his adventures, or his writings in conversation. He
was, however, able to overcome this reluctance on the lecture platform.
Our author’s tendency to philosophical discussion is strikingly set
forth in a letter from Dr. Titus Munson Coan to the latter’s mother,
written while a student at Williams College over thirty years ago,
and fortunately preserved by her. Dr. Coan enjoyed the friendship and
confidence of Mr. Melville during most of his residence in New York. The
letter reads:--

‘I have made my first literary pilgrimage, a call upon Herman Melville,
the renowned author of ‘Typee,’ etc. He lives in a spacious farmhouse
about two miles from Pittsfield, a weary walk through the dust. But it
as well repaid. I introduced myself as a Hawaiian-American, and soon
found myself in full tide of talk, or rather of monologue. But he would
not repeat the experiences of which I had been reading with rapture in
his books. In vain I sought to hear of Typee and those paradise islands,
but he preferred to pour forth his philosophy and his theories of
life. The shade of Aristotle arose like a cold mist between myself and
Fayaway. We have quite enough of deep philosophy at Williams College,
and I confess I was disappointed in this trend of the talk. But what
a talk it was! Melville is transformed from a Marquesan to a gypsy
student, the gypsy element still remaining strong within him. And this
contradiction gives him the air of one who has suffered from opposition,
both literary and social. With his liberal views, he is apparently
considered by the good people of Pittsfield as little better than a
cannibal or a ‘beach-comber.’ His attitude seemed to me something like
that of Ishmael; but perhaps I judged hastily. I managed to draw him out
very freely on everything but the Marquesas Islands, and when I left him
he was in full tide of discourse on all things sacred and profane. But
he seems to put away the objective side of his life, and to shut himself
up in this cold north as a cloistered thinker.’

I have been told by Dr. Coan that his father, the Rev. Titus Coan, of
the Hawaiian Islands, personally visited the Marquesas group, found
the Typee Valley, and verified in all respects the statements made
in ‘Typee.’ It is known that Mr. Melville from early manhood indulged
deeply in philosophical studies, and his fondness for discussing such
matters is pointed out by Hawthorne also, in the ‘English Note Books.’
This habit increased as he advanced in years, if possible.

The chief event of the residence in Pittsfield was the completion and
publication of ‘Moby Dick; or, the Whale,’ in 1851. How many young men
have been drawn to sea by this book is a question of interest. Meeting
with Mr. Charles Henry Webb [‘John Paul’) the day after Mr. Melville’s
death, I asked him if he were not familiar with that author’s writings.
He replied that ‘Moby Dick’ was responsible for his three years of life
before the mast when a lad, and added that while ‘gamming’ on board
another vessel he had once fallen in with a member of the boat’s crew
which rescued Melville from his friendly imprisonment among the Typees.

While at Pittsfield, besides his own family, Mr. Melville’s mother
and sisters resided with him. As his four children grew up he found
it necessary to obtain for them better facilities for study than the
village school afforded; and so, several years after, the household was
broken up, and he removed with his wife and children to the New York
house that was afterwards his home. This house belonged to his brother
Allan, and was exchanged for the estate at Pittsfield. In December,
1866, he was appointed by Mr. H. A. Smyth, a former travelling companion
in Europe, a district officer in the New York Custom House. He held the
position until 1886, preferring it to in-door clerical work, and then
resigned, the duties becoming too arduous for his failing strength.

In addition to his philosophical studies, Mr. Melville was much
interested in all matters relating to the fine arts, and devoted most of
his leisure hours to the two subjects. A notable collection of etchings
and engravings from the old masters was gradually made by him, those
from Claude’s paintings being a specialty. After he retired from the
Custom House, his tall, stalwart figure could be seen almost daily
tramping through the Fort George district or Central Park, his roving
inclination leading him to obtain as much out-door life as possible.
His evenings were spent at home with his books, his pictures, and his
family, and usually with them alone; for, in spite of the melodramatic
declarations of various English gentlemen, Melville’s seclusion in his
latter years, and in fact throughout his life, was a matter of personal
choice. More and more, as he grew older, he avoided every action on his
part, and on the part of his family, that might tend to keep his name
and writings before the public. A few friends felt at liberty to visit
the recluse, and were kindly welcomed, but he himself sought no one. His
favorite companions were his grandchildren, with whom he delighted to
pass his time, and his devoted wife, who was a constant assistant and
adviser in his literary work, chiefly done at this period for his
own amusement. To her he addressed his last little poem, the touching
‘Return of the Sire de Nesle.’ Various efforts were made by the New York
literary colony to draw him from his retirement, but without success.
It has been suggested that he might have accepted a magazine editorship,
but this is doubtful, as he could not bear business details or routine
work of any sort. His brother Allan was a New York lawyer, and until his
death, in 1872, managed Melville’s affairs with ability, particularly
the literary accounts.

During these later years he took great pleasure in a friendly
correspondence with Mr. W. Clark Russell. Mr. Russell had taken many
occasions to mention Melville’s sea-tales, his interest in them, and his
indebtedness to them. The latter felt impelled to write Mr. Russell in
regard to one of his newly published novels, and received in answer the
following letter:

July 21, 1886.

MY DEAR Mr. MELVILLE, Your letter has given me a very great and singular
pleasure. Your delightful books carry the imagination into a maritime
period so remote that, often as you have been in my mind, I could
never satisfy myself that you were still amongst the living. I am glad,
indeed, to learn from Mr. Toft that you are still hale and hearty, and I
do most heartily wish you many years yet of health and vigour.

Your books I have in the American edition. I have ‘Typee, ‘Omoo,’
‘Redburn,’ and that noble piece ‘Moby Dick.’ These are all I have been
able to obtain. There have been many editions of your works in this
country, particularly the lovely South Sea sketches; but the editions
are not equal to those of the American publishers. Your reputation here
is very great. It is hard to meet a man whose opinion as a reader is
worth leaving who does not speak of your works in such terms as he
might hesitate to employ, with all his patriotism, toward many renowned
English writers.

Dana is, indeed, great. There is nothing in literature more remarkable
than the impression produced by Dana’s portraiture of the homely inner
life of a little brig’s forecastle.

I beg that you will accept my thanks for the kindly spirit in which you
have read my books. I wish it were in my power to cross the Atlantic,
for you assuredly would be the first whom it would be my happiness to
visit.

The condition of my right hand obliges me to dictate this to my son;
but painful as it is to me to hold a pen, I cannot suffer this letter
to reach the hands of a man of so admirable genitis as Herman Melville
without begging him to believe me to be, with my own hand, his most
respectful and hearty admirer, W. Clark Russell.

It should be noted here that Melville’s increased reputation in England
at the period of this letter was chiefly owing to a series of articles
on his work written by Mr. Russell. I am sorry to say that few English
papers made more than a passing reference to Melville’s death. The
American press discussed his life and work in numerous and lengthy
reviews. At the same time, there always has been a steady sale of his
books in England, and some of them never have been out of print in that
country since the publication of ‘Typee.’ One result of this friendship
between the two authors was the dedication of new volumes to each other
in highly complimentary terms--Mr. Melville’s ‘John Marr and Other
Sailors,’ of which twenty-five copies only were printed, on the one
hand, and Mr. Russell’s ‘An Ocean Tragedy,’ on the other, of which many
thousand have been printed, not to mention unnumbered pirated copies.

Beside Hawthorne, Mr. Richard Henry Stoddard, of American writers,
specially knew and appreciated Herman Melville. Mr. Stoddard was
connected with the New York dock department at the time of Mr.
Melville’s appointment to a custom-house position, and they at once
became acquainted. For a good many years, during the period in which
our author remained in seclusion, much that appeared in print in America
concerning Melville came from the pen of Mr. Stoddard. Nevertheless,
the sailor author’s presence in New York was well known to the literary
guild. He was invited to join in all new movements, but as often felt
obliged to excuse himself from doing so. The present writer lived for
some time within a short distance of his house, but found no opportunity
to meet him until it became necessary to obtain his portrait for an
anthology in course of publication. The interview was brief, and the
interviewer could not help feeling although treated with pleasant
courtesy, that more important matters were in hand than the perpetuation
of a romancer’s countenance to future generations; but a friendly family
acquaintance grew up from the incident, and will remain an abiding
memory.

Mr. Melville died at his home in New York City early on the morning of
September 28, 1891. His serious illness had lasted a number of
months, so that the end came as a release. True to his ruling passion,
philosophy had claimed him to the last, a set of Schopenhauer’s works
receiving his attention when able to study; but this was varied with
readings in the ‘Mermaid Series’ of old plays, in which he took much
pleasure. His library, in addition to numerous works on philosophy and
the fine arts, was composed of standard books of all classes, including,
of course, a proportion of nautical literature. Especially interesting
are fifteen or twenty first editions of Hawthorne’s books inscribed to
Mr. and Mrs. Melville by the author and his wife.

The immediate acceptance of ‘Typee’ by John Murray was followed by an
arrangement with the London agent of an American publisher, for its
simultaneous publication in the United States. I understand that Murray
did not then publish fiction. At any rate, the book was accepted by him
on the assurance of Gansevoort Melville that it contained nothing not
actually experienced by his brother. Murray brought it out early in
1846, in his Colonial and Home Library, as ‘A Narrative of a Four
Months’ Residence among the Natives of a Valley of the Marquesas
Islands; or, a Peep at Polynesian Life,’ or, more briefly, ‘Melville’s
Marquesas Islands.’ It was issued in America with the author’s own
title, ‘Typee,’ and in the outward shape of a work of fiction. Mr.
Melville found himself famous at once. Many discussions were carried on
as to the genuineness of the author’s name and the reality of the events
portrayed, but English and American critics alike recognised the book’s
importance as a contribution to literature.

Melville, in a letter to Hawthorne, speaks of himself as having no
development at all until his twenty-fifth year, the time of his return
from the Pacific; but surely the process of development must have been
well advanced to permit of so virile and artistic a creation as ‘Typee.’
While the narrative does not always run smoothly, yet the style for the
most part is graceful and alluring, so that we pass from one scene of
Pacific enchantment to another quite oblivious of the vast amount of
descriptive detail which is being poured out upon us. It is the varying
fortune of the hero which engrosses our attention. We follow his
adventures with breathless interest, or luxuriate with him in the leafy
bowers of the ‘Happy Valley,’ surrounded by joyous children of nature.
When all is ended, we then for the first time realise that we know these
people and their ways as if we too had dwelt among them.

I do not believe that ‘Typee’ will ever lose its position as a classic
of American Literature. The pioneer in South Sea romance--for
the mechanical descriptions of earlier voyagers are not worthy of
comparison--this book has as yet met with no superior, even in French
literature; nor has it met with a rival in any other language than the
French. The character of ‘Fayaway,’ and, no less, William S. Mayo’s
‘Kaloolah,’ the enchanting dreams of many a youthful heart, will retain
their charm; and this in spite of endless variations by modern explorers
in the same domain. A faint type of both characters may be found in the
Surinam Yarico of Captain John Gabriel Stedman, whose ‘Narrative of a
Five Years’ Expedition’ appeared in 1796.

‘Typee,’ as written, contained passages reflecting with considerable
severity on the methods pursued by missionaries in the South Seas. The
manuscript was printed in a complete form in England, and created much
discussion on this account, Melville being accused of bitterness; but he
asserted his lack of prejudice. The passages referred to were omitted in
the first and all subsequent American editions. They have been restored
in the present issue, which is complete save for a few paragraphs
excluded by written direction of the author. I have, with the consent
of his family, changed the long and cumbersome sub-title of the book,
calling it a ‘Real-Romance of the South Seas,’ as best expressing its
nature.

The success of his first volume encouraged Melville to proceed in his
work, and ‘Omoo,’ the sequel to ‘Typee,’ appeared in England and America
in 1847. Here we leave, for the most part, the dreamy pictures of island
life, and find ourselves sharing the extremely realistic discomforts of
a Sydney whaler in the early forties. The rebellious crew’s experiences
in the Society Islands are quite as realistic as events on board ship
and very entertaining, while the whimsical character, Dr. Long Ghost,
next to Captain Ahab in ‘Moby Dick,’ is Melville’s most striking
delineation. The errors of the South Sea missions are pointed out with
even more force than in ‘Typee,’ and it is a fact that both these books
have ever since been of the greatest value to outgoing missionaries on
account of the exact information contained in them with respect to the
islanders.

Melville’s power in describing and investing with romance scenes and
incidents witnessed and participated in by himself, and his frequent
failure of success as an inventor of characters and situations, were
early pointed out by his critics. More recently Mr. Henry S. Salt
has drawn the same distinction very carefully in an excellent article
contributed to the Scottish Art Review. In a prefatory note to ‘Mardi’
(1849), Melville declares that, as his former books have been received
as romance instead of reality, he will now try his hand at pure fiction.
‘Mardi’ may be called a splendid failure. It must have been soon after
the completion of ‘Omoo’ that Melville began to study the writings of
Sir Thomas Browne. Heretofore our author’s style was rough in places,
but marvellously simple and direct. ‘Mardi’ is burdened with an
over-rich diction, which Melville never entirely outgrew. The scene
of this romance, which opens well, is laid in the South Seas, but
everything soon becomes overdrawn and fantastical, and the thread of the
story loses itself in a mystical allegory.

‘Redburn,’ already mentioned, succeeded ‘Mardi’ in the same year, and
was a partial return to the author’s earlier style. In ‘White-Jacket;
or, the World in a Man-of-War’ (1850), Melville almost regained it. This
book has no equal as a picture of life aboard a sailing man-of-war, the
lights and shadows of naval existence being well contrasted.

With ‘Moby Dick; or, the Whale’ (1851), Melville reached the topmost
notch of his fame. The book represents, to a certain extent, the
conflict between the author’s earlier and later methods of composition,
but the gigantic conception of the ‘White Whale,’ as Hawthorne expressed
it, permeates the whole work, and lifts it bodily into the highest
domain of romance. ‘Moby Dick’ contains an immense amount of information
concerning the habits of the whale and the methods of its capture, but
this is characteristically introduced in a way not to interfere with
the narrative. The chapter entitled ‘Stubb Kills a Whale’ ranks with the
choicest examples of descriptive literature.

‘Moby Dick’ appeared, and Melville enjoyed to the full the enhanced
reputation it brought him. He did not, however, take warning from
‘Mardi,’ but allowed himself to plunge more deeply into the sea of
philosophy and fantasy.

‘Pierre; or, the Ambiguities’ (1852) was published, and there ensued
a long series of hostile criticisms, ending with a severe, though
impartial, article by Fitz-James O’Brien in Putnam’s Monthly. About the
same time the whole stock of the author’s books was destroyed by fire,
keeping them out of print at a critical moment; and public interest,
which until then had been on the increase, gradually began to diminish.

After this Mr. Melville contributed several short stories to Putnam’s
Monthly and Harper’s Magazine. Those in the former periodical were
collected in a volume as Piazza Tales (1856); and of these ‘Benito
Cereno’ and ‘The Bell Tower’ are equal to his best previous efforts.

‘Israel Potter: His Fifty Years of Exile’ (1855), first printed as a
serial in Putnam’s, is an historical romance of the American Revolution,
based on the hero’s own account of his adventures, as given in a little
volume picked up by Mr. Melville at a book-stall. The story is well
told, but the book is hardly worthy of the author of ‘Typee.’ ‘The
Confidence Man’ (1857), his last serious effort in prose fiction, does
not seem to require criticism.

Mr. Melville’s pen had rested for nearly ten years, when it was again
taken up to celebrate the events of the Civil War. ‘Battle Pieces and
Aspects of the War’ appeared in 1866. Most of these poems originated,
according to the author, in an impulse imparted by the fall of Richmond;
but they have as subjects all the chief incidents of the struggle. The
best of them are ‘The Stone Fleet,’ ‘In the Prison Pen,’ ‘The College
Colonel,’ ‘The March to the Sea,’ ‘Running the Batteries,’ and ‘Sheridan
at Cedar Creek.’ Some of these had a wide circulation in the press, and
were preserved in various anthologies. ‘Clarel, a Poem and Pilgrimage
in the Holy Land’ (1876), is a long mystical poem requiring, as some one
has said, a dictionary, a cyclopaedia, and a copy of the Bible for its
elucidation. In the two privately printed volumes, the arrangement of
which occupied Mr. Melville during his last illness, there are several
fine lyrics. The titles of these books are, ‘John Marr and Other
Sailors’ (1888), and ‘Timoleon’ (1891).

There is no question that Mr. Melville’s absorption in philosophical
studies was quite as responsible as the failure of his later books for
his cessation from literary productiveness. That he sometimes realised
the situation will be seen by a passage in ‘Moby Dick’:--

‘Didn’t I tell you so?’ said Flask. ‘Yes, you’ll soon see this right
whale’s head hoisted up opposite that parmacetti’s.’

‘In good time Flask’s saying proved true. As before, the Pequod steeply
leaned over towards the sperm whale’s head, now, by the counterpoise of
both heads, she regained her own keel, though sorely strained, you may
well believe. So, when on one side you hoist in Locke’s head, you go
over that way; but now, on the other side, hoist in Kant’s and you
come back again; but in very poor plight. Thus, some minds forever keep
trimming boat. Oh, ye foolish! throw all these thunderheads overboard,
and then you will float right and light.’

Mr. Melville would have been more than mortal if he had been indifferent
to his loss of popularity. Yet he seemed contented to preserve an
entirely independent attitude, and to trust to the verdict of the
future. The smallest amount of activity would have kept him before the
public; but his reserve would not permit this. That reinstatement of his
reputation cannot be doubted.

In the editing of this reissue of ‘Melville’s Works,’ I have been
much indebted to the scholarly aid of Dr. Titus Munson Coan, whose
familiarity with the languages of the Pacific has enabled me to
harmonise the spelling of foreign words in ‘Typee’ and ‘Omoo,’ though
without changing the phonetic method of printing adopted by Mr.
Melville. Dr. Coan has also been most helpful with suggestions in other
directions. Finally, the delicate fancy of La Fargehas supplemented the
immortal pen-portrait of the Typee maiden with a speaking impersonation
of her beauty.

New York, June, 1892.




TYPEE



CHAPTER ONE

THE SEA--LONGINGS FOR SHORE--A LAND-SICK SHIP--DESTINATION OF THE
VOYAGERS--THE MARQUESAS--ADVENTURE OF A MISSIONARY’S WIFE AMONG THE
SAVAGES--CHARACTERISTIC ANECDOTE OF THE QUEEN OF NUKUHEVA


Six months at sea! Yes, reader, as I live, six months out of sight of
land; cruising after the sperm-whale beneath the scorching sun of the
Line, and tossed on the billows of the wide-rolling Pacific--the sky
above, the sea around, and nothing else! Weeks and weeks ago our fresh
provisions were all exhausted. There is not a sweet potato left; not a
single yam. Those glorious bunches of bananas, which once decorated
our stern and quarter-deck, have, alas, disappeared! and the delicious
oranges which hung suspended from our tops and stays--they, too, are
gone! Yes, they are all departed, and there is nothing left us but
salt-horse and sea-biscuit. Oh! ye state-room sailors, who make so
much ado about a fourteen-days’ passage across the Atlantic; who so
pathetically relate the privations and hardships of the sea, where,
after a day of breakfasting, lunching, dining off five courses,
chatting, playing whist, and drinking champagne-punch, it was your hard
lot to be shut up in little cabinets of mahogany and maple, and sleep
for ten hours, with nothing to disturb you but ‘those good-for-nothing
tars, shouting and tramping overhead’,--what would ye say to our six
months out of sight of land?

Oh! for a refreshing glimpse of one blade of grass--for a snuff at the
fragrance of a handful of the loamy earth! Is there nothing fresh around
us? Is there no green thing to be seen? Yes, the inside of our bulwarks
is painted green; but what a vile and sickly hue it is, as if nothing
bearing even the semblance of verdure could flourish this weary way from
land. Even the bark that once clung to the wood we use for fuel has been
gnawed off and devoured by the captain’s pig; and so long ago, too, that
the pig himself has in turn been devoured.

There is but one solitary tenant in the chicken-coop, once a gay and
dapper young cock, bearing him so bravely among the coy hens.

But look at him now; there he stands, moping all the day long on that
everlasting one leg of his. He turns with disgust from the mouldy corn
before him, and the brackish water in his little trough. He mourns no
doubt his lost companions, literally snatched from him one by one, and
never seen again. But his days of mourning will be few for Mungo, our
black cook, told me yesterday that the word had at last gone forth, and
poor Pedro’s fate was sealed. His attenuated body will be laid out upon
the captain’s table next Sunday, and long before night will be buried
with all the usual ceremonies beneath that worthy individual’s vest. Who
would believe that there could be any one so cruel as to long for the
decapitation of the luckless Pedro; yet the sailors pray every minute,
selfish fellows, that the miserable fowl may be brought to his end. They
say the captain will never point the ship for the land so long as he
has in anticipation a mess of fresh meat. This unhappy bird can alone
furnish it; and when he is once devoured, the captain will come to his
senses. I wish thee no harm, Pedro; but as thou art doomed, sooner or
later, to meet the fate of all thy race; and if putting a period to
thy existence is to be the signal for our deliverance, why--truth to
speak--I wish thy throat cut this very moment; for, oh! how I wish to
see the living earth again! The old ship herself longs to look out upon
the land from her hawse-holes once more, and Jack Lewis said right the
other day when the captain found fault with his steering.

‘Why d’ye see, Captain Vangs,’ says bold Jack, ‘I’m as good a helmsman
as ever put hand to spoke; but none of us can steer the old lady now. We
can’t keep her full and bye, sir; watch her ever so close, she will fall
off and then, sir, when I put the helm down so gently, and try like to
coax her to the work, she won’t take it kindly, but will fall round off
again; and it’s all because she knows the land is under the lee, sir,
and she won’t go any more to windward.’ Aye, and why should she, Jack?
didn’t every one of her stout timbers grow on shore, and hasn’t she
sensibilities; as well as we?

Poor old ship! Her very looks denote her desires! how deplorably she
appears! The paint on her sides, burnt up by the scorching sun, is
puffed out and cracked. See the weeds she trails along with her, and
what an unsightly bunch of those horrid barnacles has formed about her
stern-piece; and every time she rises on a sea, she shows her copper
torn away, or hanging in jagged strips.

Poor old ship! I say again: for six months she has been rolling and
pitching about, never for one moment at rest. But courage, old lass, I
hope to see thee soon within a biscuit’s toss of the merry land, riding
snugly at anchor in some green cove, and sheltered from the boisterous
winds.

        . . . . . .

‘Hurra, my lads! It’s a settled thing; next week we shape our course to
the Marquesas!’ The Marquesas! What strange visions of outlandish things
does the very name spirit up! Naked houris--cannibal banquets--groves
of cocoanut--coral reefs--tattooed chiefs--and bamboo temples; sunny
valleys planted with bread-fruit-trees--carved canoes dancing on
the flashing blue waters--savage woodlands guarded by horrible
idols--HEATHENISH RITES AND HUMAN SACRIFICES.

Such were the strangely jumbled anticipations that haunted me during our
passage from the cruising ground. I felt an irresistible curiosity to
see those islands which the olden voyagers had so glowingly described.

The group for which we were now steering (although among the earliest of
European discoveries in the South Seas, having been first visited in
the year 1595) still continues to be tenanted by beings as strange
and barbarous as ever. The missionaries sent on a heavenly errand, had
sailed by their lovely shores, and had abandoned them to their idols of
wood and stone. How interesting the circumstances under which they were
discovered! In the watery path of Mendanna, cruising in quest of some
region of gold, these isles had sprung up like a scene of enchantment,
and for a moment the Spaniard believed his bright dream was realized.

In honour of the Marquess de Mendoza, then viceroy of Peru--under whose
auspices the navigator sailed--he bestowed upon them the name which
denoted the rank of his patron, and gave to the world on his return
a vague and magnificent account of their beauty. But these islands,
undisturbed for years, relapsed into their previous obscurity; and it is
only recently that anything has been known concerning them. Once in the
course of a half century, to be sure, some adventurous rover would break
in upon their peaceful repose, and astonished at the unusual scene,
would be almost tempted to claim the merit of a new discovery.

Of this interesting group, but little account has ever been given, if
we except the slight mention made of them in the sketches of South-Sea
voyages. Cook, in his repeated circumnavigations of the globe, barely
touched at their shores; and all that we know about them is from a few
general narratives.

Among these, there are two that claim particular notice. Porter’s
‘Journal of the Cruise of the U.S. frigate Essex, in the Pacific,
during the late War’, is said to contain some interesting particulars
concerning the islanders. This is a work, however, which I have never
happened to meet with; and Stewart, the chaplain of the American sloop
of war Vincennes, has likewise devoted a portion of his book, entitled
‘A Visit to the South Seas’, to the same subject.

Within the last few, years American and English vessels engaged in the
extensive whale fisheries of the Pacific have occasionally, when short
of provisions, put into the commodious harbour which there is in one of
the islands; but a fear of the natives, founded on the recollection of
the dreadful fate which many white men have received at their hands, has
deterred their crews from intermixing with the population sufficiently
to gain any insight into their peculiar customs and manners.

The Protestant Missions appear to have despaired of reclaiming these
islands from heathenism. The usage they have in every case received from
the natives has been such as to intimidate the boldest of their number.
Ellis, in his ‘Polynesian Researches’, gives some interesting accounts
of the abortive attempts made by the ‘’Tahiti Mission’’ to establish a
branch Mission upon certain islands of the group. A short time before
my visit to the Marquesas, a somewhat amusing incident took place in
connection with these efforts, which I cannot avoid relating.

An intrepid missionary, undaunted by the ill-success that had attended
all previous endeavours to conciliate the savages, and believing much
in the efficacy of female influence, introduced among them his young and
beautiful wife, the first white woman who had ever visited their shores.
The islanders at first gazed in mute admiration at so unusual a prodigy,
and seemed inclined to regard it as some new divinity. But after a short
time, becoming familiar with its charming aspect, and jealous of the
folds which encircled its form, they sought to pierce the sacred veil
of calico in which it was enshrined, and in the gratification of their
curiosity so far overstepped the limits of good breeding, as deeply
to offend the lady’s sense of decorum. Her sex once ascertained, their
idolatry was changed into contempt and there was no end to the contumely
showered upon her by the savages, who were exasperated at the deception
which they conceived had been practised upon them. To the horror of
her affectionate spouse, she was stripped of her garments, and given to
understand that she could no longer carry on her deceits with impunity.
The gentle dame was not sufficiently evangelical to endure this, and,
fearful of further improprieties, she forced her husband to relinquish
his undertaking, and together they returned to Tahiti.

Not thus shy of exhibiting her charms was the Island Queen herself, the
beauteous wife of Movianna, the king of Nukuheva. Between two and three
years after the adventures recorded in this volume, I chanced, while
aboard of a man-of-war to touch at these islands. The French had
then held possession of the Marquesas some time, and already prided
themselves upon the beneficial effects of their jurisdiction, as
discernible in the deportment of the natives. To be sure, in one of
their efforts at reform they had slaughtered about a hundred and fifty
of them at Whitihoo--but let that pass. At the time I mention, the
French squadron was rendezvousing in the bay of Nukuheva, and during an
interview between one of their captains and our worthy Commodore, it
was suggested by the former, that we, as the flag-ship of the American
squadron, should receive, in state, a visit from the royal pair. The
French officer likewise represented, with evident satisfaction, that
under their tuition the king and queen had imbibed proper notions of
their elevated station, and on all ceremonious occasions conducted
themselves with suitable dignity. Accordingly, preparations were made to
give their majesties a reception on board in a style corresponding with
their rank.

One bright afternoon, a gig, gaily bedizened with streamers, was
observed to shove off from the side of one of the French frigates, and
pull directly for our gangway. In the stern sheets reclined Mowanna and
his consort. As they approached, we paid them all the honours due to
royalty;--manning our yards, firing a salute, and making a prodigious
hubbub.

They ascended the accommodation ladder, were greeted by the Commodore,
hat in hand, and passing along the quarter-deck, the marine guard
presented arms, while the band struck up ‘The King of the Cannibal
Islands’. So far all went well. The French officers grimaced and smiled
in exceedingly high spirits, wonderfully pleased with the discreet
manner in which these distinguished personages behaved themselves.

Their appearance was certainly calculated to produce an effect. His
majesty was arrayed in a magnificent military uniform, stiff with gold
lace and embroidery, while his shaven crown was concealed by a huge
chapeau bras, waving with ostrich plumes. There was one slight blemish,
however, in his appearance. A broad patch of tattooing stretched
completely across his face, in a line with his eyes, making him look as
if he wore a huge pair of goggles; and royalty in goggles suggested some
ludicrous ideas. But it was in the adornment of the fair person of his
dark-complexioned spouse that the tailors of the fleet had evinced the
gaiety of their national taste. She was habited in a gaudy tissue of
scarlet cloth, trimmed with yellow silk, which, descending a little
below the knees, exposed to view her bare legs, embellished with spiral
tattooing, and somewhat resembling two miniature Trajan’s columns. Upon
her head was a fanciful turban of purple velvet, figured with silver
sprigs, and surmounted by a tuft of variegated feathers.

The ship’s company, crowding into the gangway to view the sight, soon
arrested her majesty’s attention. She singled out from their number an
old salt, whose bare arms and feet, and exposed breast, were covered
with as many inscriptions in India ink as the lid of an Egyptian
sarcophagus. Notwithstanding all the sly hints and remonstrances of the
French officers, she immediately approached the man, and pulling further
open the bosom of his duck frock, and rolling up the leg of his wide
trousers, she gazed with admiration at the bright blue and vermilion
pricking thus disclosed to view. She hung over the fellow, caressing
him, and expressing her delight in a variety of wild exclamations and
gestures. The embarrassment of the polite Gauls at such an unlooked-for
occurrence may be easily imagined, but picture their consternation, when
all at once the royal lady, eager to display the hieroglyphics on her
own sweet form, bent forward for a moment, and turning sharply round,
threw up the skirt of her mantle and revealed a sight from which the
aghast Frenchmen retreated precipitately, and tumbling into their boats,
fled the scene of so shocking a catastrophe.




CHAPTER TWO

PASSAGE FROM THE CRUISING GROUND TO THE MARQUESAS--SLEEPY TIMES ABOARD
SHIP--SOUTH SEA SCENERY--LAND HO--THE FRENCH SQUADRON DISCOVERED AT
ANCHOR IN THE BAY OF NUKUHEVA--STRANGE PILOT--ESCORT OF CANOES--A
FLOTILLA OF COCOANUTS--SWIMMING VISITORS--THE DOLLY BOARDED BY
THEM--STATE OF AFFAIRS THAT ENSUE


I can never forget the eighteen or twenty days during which the light
trade-winds were silently sweeping us towards the islands. In pursuit of
the sperm whale, we had been cruising on the line some twenty degrees
to the westward of the Gallipagos; and all that we had to do, when our
course was determined on, was to square in the yards and keep the vessel
before the breeze, and then the good ship and the steady gale did the
rest between them. The man at the wheel never vexed the old lady with
any superfluous steering, but comfortably adjusting his limbs at the
tiller, would doze away by the hour. True to her work, the Dolly headed
to her course, and like one of those characters who always do best when
let alone, she jogged on her way like a veteran old sea-pacer as she
was.

What a delightful, lazy, languid time we had whilst we were thus gliding
along! There was nothing to be done; a circumstance that happily
suited our disinclination to do anything. We abandoned the fore-peak
altogether, and spreading an awning over the forecastle, slept, ate,
and lounged under it the live-long day. Every one seemed to be under the
influence of some narcotic. Even the officers aft, whose duty required
them never to be seated while keeping a deck watch, vainly endeavoured
to keep on their pins; and were obliged invariably to compromise the
matter by leaning up against the bulwarks, and gazing abstractedly over
the side. Reading was out of the question; take a book in your hand, and
you were asleep in an instant.

Although I could not avoid yielding in a great measure to the general
languor, still at times I contrived to shake off the spell, and to
appreciate the beauty of the scene around me. The sky presented a
clear expanse of the most delicate blue, except along the skirts of the
horizon, where you might see a thin drapery of pale clouds which never
varied their form or colour. The long, measured, dirge-like well of
the Pacific came rolling along, with its surface broken by little tiny
waves, sparkling in the sunshine. Every now and then a shoal of flying
fish, scared from the water under the bows, would leap into the air,
and fall the next moment like a shower of silver into the sea. Then you
would see the superb albicore, with his glittering sides, sailing aloft,
and often describing an arc in his descent, disappear on the surface of
the water. Far off, the lofty jet of the whale might be seen, and nearer
at hand the prowling shark, that villainous footpad of the seas, would
come skulking along, and, at a wary distance, regard us with his evil
eye. At times, some shapeless monster of the deep, floating on the
surface, would, as we approached, sink slowly into the blue waters, and
fade away from the sight. But the most impressive feature of the
scene was the almost unbroken silence that reigned over sky and water.
Scarcely a sound could be heard but the occasional breathing of the
grampus, and the rippling at the cut-water.

As we drew nearer the land, I hailed with delight the appearance of
innumerable sea-fowl. Screaming and whirling in spiral tracks, they
would accompany the vessel, and at times alight on our yards and
stays. That piratical-looking fellow, appropriately named the
man-of-war’s-hawk, with his blood-red bill and raven plumage, would
come sweeping round us in gradually diminishing circles, till you
could distinctly mark the strange flashings of his eye; and then, as if
satisfied with his observation, would sail up into the air and disappear
from the view. Soon, other evidences of our vicinity to the land were
apparent, and it was not long before the glad announcement of its being
in sight was heard from aloft,--given with that peculiar prolongation of
sound that a sailor loves--‘Land ho!’

The captain, darting on deck from the cabin, bawled lustily for his
spy-glass; the mate in still louder accents hailed the masthead with a
tremendous ‘where-away?’ The black cook thrust his woolly head from the
galley, and Boatswain, the dog, leaped up between the knight-heads, and
barked most furiously. Land ho! Aye, there it was. A hardly perceptible
blue irregular outline, indicating the bold contour of the lofty heights
of Nukuheva.

This island, although generally called one of the Marquesas, is by some
navigators considered as forming one of a distinct cluster, comprising
the islands of Ruhooka, Ropo, and Nukuheva; upon which three the
appellation of the Washington Group has been bestowed. They form a
triangle, and lie within the parallels of 8° 38″ and 9° 32″ South
latitude and 139° 20′ and 140° 10′ West longitude from Greenwich. With
how little propriety they are to be regarded as forming a separate
group will be at once apparent, when it is considered that they lie in
the immediate vicinity of the other islands, that is to say, less than
a degree to the northwest of them; that their inhabitants speak the
Marquesan dialect, and that their laws, religion, and general customs
are identical. The only reason why they were ever thus arbitrarily
distinguished may be attributed to the singular fact, that their
existence was altogether unknown to the world until the year 1791, when
they were discovered by Captain Ingraham, of Boston, Massachusetts,
nearly two centuries after the discovery of the adjacent islands by the
agent of the Spanish Viceroy. Notwithstanding this, I shall follow the
example of most voyagers, and treat of them as forming part and parcel
of Marquesas.

Nukuheva is the most important of these islands, being the only one
at which ships are much in the habit of touching, and is celebrated as
being the place where the adventurous Captain Porter refitted his ships
during the late war between England and the United States, and whence he
sallied out upon the large whaling fleet then sailing under the enemy’s
flag in the surrounding seas. This island is about twenty miles in
length and nearly as many in breadth. It has three good harbours on its
coast; the largest and best of which is called by the people living
in its vicinity ‘Taiohae’, and by Captain Porter was denominated
Massachusetts Bay. Among the adverse tribes dwelling about the shores of
the other bays, and by all voyagers, it is generally known by the name
bestowed upon the island itself--Nukuheva. Its inhabitants have become
somewhat corrupted, owing to their recent commerce with Europeans, but
so far as regards their peculiar customs and general mode of life, they
retain their original primitive character, remaining very nearly in the
same state of nature in which they were first beheld by white men. The
hostile clans, residing in the more remote sections of the island, and
very seldom holding any communication with foreigners, are in every
respect unchanged from their earliest known condition.

In the bay of Nukuheva was the anchorage we desired to reach. We had
perceived the loom of the mountains about sunset; so that after running
all night with a very light breeze, we found ourselves close in with
the island the next morning, but as the bay we sought lay on its farther
side, we were obliged to sail some distance along the shore, catching,
as we proceeded, short glimpses of blooming valleys, deep glens,
waterfalls, and waving groves hidden here and there by projecting and
rocky headlands, every moment opening to the view some new and startling
scene of beauty.

Those who for the first time visit the South Sea, generally are
surprised at the appearance of the islands when beheld from the sea.
From the vague accounts we sometimes have of their beauty, many people
are apt to picture to themselves enamelled and softly swelling plains,
shaded over with delicious groves, and watered by purling brooks, and
the entire country but little elevated above the surrounding ocean. The
reality is very different; bold rock-bound coasts, with the surf beating
high against the lofty cliffs, and broken here and there into deep
inlets, which open to the view thickly-wooded valleys, separated by the
spurs of mountains clothed with tufted grass, and sweeping down towards
the sea from an elevated and furrowed interior, form the principal
features of these islands.

Towards noon we drew abreast the entrance go the harbour, and at last
we slowly swept by the intervening promontory, and entered the bay of
Nukuheva. No description can do justice to its beauty; but that beauty
was lost to me then, and I saw nothing but the tri-coloured flag of
France trailing over the stern of six vessels, whose black hulls and
bristling broadsides proclaimed their warlike character. There they
were, floating in that lovely bay, the green eminences of the shore
looking down so tranquilly upon them, as if rebuking the sternness of
their aspect. To my eye nothing could be more out of keeping than the
presence of these vessels; but we soon learnt what brought them
there. The whole group of islands had just been taken possession of
by Rear-Admiral Du Petit Thouars, in the name of the invincible French
nation.

This item of information was imparted to us by a most extraordinary
individual, a genuine South-Sea vagabond, who came alongside of us in
a whale-boat as soon as we entered the bay, and, by the aid of some
benevolent persons at the gangway, was assisted on board, for our
visitor was in that interesting stage of intoxication when a man is
amiable and helpless. Although he was utterly unable to stand erect or
to navigate his body across the deck, he still magnanimously proffered
his services to pilot the ship to a good and secure anchorage. Our
captain, however, rather distrusted his ability in this respect, and
refused to recognize his claim to the character he assumed; but
our gentleman was determined to play his part, for, by dint of much
scrambling, he succeeded in getting into the weather-quarter boat,
where he steadied himself by holding on to a shroud, and then commenced
issuing his commands with amazing volubility and very peculiar gestures.
Of course no one obeyed his orders; but as it was impossible to quiet
him, we swept by the ships of the squadron with this strange fellow
performing his antics in full view of all the French officers.

We afterwards learned that our eccentric friend had been a lieutenant in
the English navy; but having disgraced his flag by some criminal conduct
in one of the principal ports on the main, he had deserted his ship,
and spent many years wandering among the islands of the Pacific, until
accidentally being at Nukuheva when the French took possession of
the place, he had been appointed pilot of the harbour by the newly
constituted authorities.

As we slowly advanced up the bay, numerous canoes pushed off from the
surrounding shores, and we were soon in the midst of quite a flotilla
of them, their savage occupants struggling to get aboard of us, and
jostling one another in their ineffectual attempts. Occasionally the
projecting out-riggers of their slight shallops running foul of one
another, would become entangled beneath the water, threatening to
capsize the canoes, when a scene of confusion would ensue that baffles
description. Such strange outcries and passionate gesticulations I never
certainly heard or saw before. You would have thought the islanders were
on the point of flying at each other’s throats, whereas they were only
amicably engaged in disentangling their boats.

Scattered here and there among the canoes might be seen numbers of
cocoanuts floating closely together in circular groups, and bobbing up
and down with every wave. By some inexplicable means these cocoanuts
were all steadily approaching towards the ship. As I leaned curiously
over the side, endeavouring to solve their mysterious movements, one
mass far in advance of the rest attracted my attention. In its centre
was something I could take for nothing else than a cocoanut, but which
I certainly considered one of the most extraordinary specimens of the
fruit I had ever seen. It kept twirling and dancing about among the rest
in the most singular manner, and as it drew nearer I thought it bore a
remarkable resemblance to the brown shaven skull of one of the savages.
Presently it betrayed a pair of eyes, and soon I became aware that what
I had supposed to have been one of the fruit was nothing else than the
head of an islander, who had adopted this singular method of bringing
his produce to market. The cocoanuts were all attached to one another
by strips of the husk, partly torn from the shell and rudely fastened
together. Their proprietor inserting his head into the midst of them,
impelled his necklace of cocoanuts through the water by striking out
beneath the surface with his feet.

I was somewhat astonished to perceive that among the number of natives
that surrounded us, not a single female was to be seen. At that time I
was ignorant of the fact that by the operation of the ‘taboo’ the use of
canoes in all parts of the island is rigorously prohibited to the entire
sex, for whom it is death even to be seen entering one when hauled on
shore; consequently, whenever a Marquesan lady voyages by water, she
puts in requisition the paddles of her own fair body.

We had approached within a mile and a half perhaps of this foot of
the bay, when some of the islanders, who by this time had managed to
scramble aboard of us at the risk of swamping their canoes, directed our
attention to a singular commotion in the water ahead of the vessel. At
first I imagined it to be produced by a shoal of fish sporting on the
surface, but our savage friends assured us that it was caused by a shoal
of ‘whinhenies’ (young girls), who in this manner were coming off from
the shore to welcome is. As they drew nearer, and I watched the rising
and sinking of their forms, and beheld the uplifted right arm bearing
above the water the girdle of tappa, and their long dark hair trailing
beside them as they swam, I almost fancied they could be nothing else
than so many mermaids--and very like mermaids they behaved too.

We were still some distance from the beach, and under slow headway,
when we sailed right into the midst of these swimming nymphs, and they
boarded us at every quarter; many seizing hold of the chain-plates and
springing into the chains; others, at the peril of being run over by
the vessel in her course, catching at the bob-stays, and wreathing their
slender forms about the ropes, hung suspended in the air. All of them
at length succeeded in getting up the ship’s side, where they clung
dripping with the brine and glowing from the bath, their jet-black
tresses streaming over their shoulders, and half enveloping their
otherwise naked forms. There they hung, sparkling with savage vivacity,
laughing gaily at one another, and chattering away with infinite glee.
Nor were they idle the while, for each one performed the simple offices
of the toilette for the other. Their luxuriant locks, wound up and
twisted into the smallest possible compass, were freed from the briny
element; the whole person carefully dried, and from a little round
shell that passed from hand to hand, anointed with a fragrant oil: their
adornments were completed by passing a few loose folds of white tappa,
in a modest cincture, around the waist. Thus arrayed they no longer
hesitated, but flung themselves lightly over the bulwarks, and were
quickly frolicking about the decks. Many of them went forward, perching
upon the headrails or running out upon the bowsprit, while others seated
themselves upon the taffrail, or reclined at full length upon the boats.
What a sight for us bachelor sailors! How avoid so dire a temptation?
For who could think of tumbling these artless creatures overboard, when
they had swum miles to welcome us?

Their appearance perfectly amazed me; their extreme youth, the
light clear brown of their complexions, their delicate features, and
inexpressibly graceful figures, their softly moulded limbs, and free
unstudied action, seemed as strange as beautiful.

The Dolly was fairly captured; and never I will say was vessel carried
before by such a dashing and irresistible party of boarders! The ship
taken, we could not do otherwise than yield ourselves prisoners, and for
the whole period that she remained in the bay, the Dolly, as well as her
crew, were completely in the hands of the mermaids.

In the evening after we had come to an anchor the deck was illuminated
with lanterns, and this picturesque band of sylphs, tricked out with
flowers, and dressed in robes of variegated tappa, got up a ball in
great style. These females are passionately fond of dancing, and in the
wild grace and spirit of the style excel everything I have ever seen.
The varied dances of the Marquesan girls are beautiful in the extreme,
but there is an abandoned voluptuousness in their character which I dare
not attempt to describe.




CHAPTER THREE

SOME ACCOUNT OF THE LATE OPERATIONS OF THE FRENCH AT THE
MARQUESAS--PRUDENT CONDUCT OF THE ADMIRAL--SENSATION PRODUCED BY
THE ARRIVAL OF THE STRANGERS--THE FIRST HORSE SEEN BY THE
ISLANDERS--REFLECTIONS--MISERABLE SUBTERFUGE OF THE FRENCH--DIGRESSION
CONCERNING TAHITI--SEIZURE OF THE ISLAND BY THE ADMIRAL--SPIRITED
CONDUCT OF AN ENGLISH LADY


It was in the summer of 1842 that we arrived at the islands; the French
had then held possession of them for several weeks. During this time
they had visited some of the principal places in the group, and had
disembarked at various points about five hundred troops. These were
employed in constructing works of defence, and otherwise providing
against the attacks of the natives, who at any moment might be expected
to break out in open hostility. The islanders looked upon the people who
made this cavalier appropriation of their shores with mingled feelings
of fear and detestation. They cordially hated them; but the impulses
of their resentment were neutralized by their dread of the floating
batteries, which lay with their fatal tubes ostentatiously pointed,
not at fortifications and redoubts, but at a handful of bamboo sheds,
sheltered in a grove of cocoanuts! A valiant warrior doubtless, but
a prudent one too, was this same Rear-Admiral Du Petit Thouars. Four
heavy, doublebanked frigates and three corvettes to frighten a parcel of
naked heathen into subjection! Sixty-eight pounders to demolish huts of
cocoanut boughs, and Congreve rockets to set on fire a few canoe sheds!

At Nukuheva, there were about one hundred soldiers ashore. They were
encamped in tents, constructed of the old sails and spare spars of
the squadron, within the limits of a redoubt mounted with a few
nine-pounders, and surrounded with a fosse. Every other day, these
troops were marched out in martial array, to a level piece of ground
in the vicinity, and there for hours went through all sorts of military
evolutions, surrounded by flocks of the natives, who looked on with
savage admiration at the show, and as savage a hatred of the actors.
A regiment of the Old Guard, reviewed on a summer’s day in the Champs
Elysees, could not have made a more critically correct appearance. The
officers’ regimentals, resplendent with gold lace and embroidery as if
purposely calculated to dazzle the islanders, looked as if just unpacked
from their Parisian cases.

The sensation produced by the presence of the strangers had not in the
least subsided at the period of our arrival at the islands. The natives
still flocked in numbers about the encampment, and watched with the
liveliest curiosity everything that was going forward. A blacksmith’s
forge, which had been set up in the shelter of a grove near the beach,
attracted so great a crowd, that it required the utmost efforts of the
sentries posted around to keep the inquisitive multitude at a sufficient
distance to allow the workmen to ply their vocation. But nothing gained
so large a share of admiration as a horse, which had been brought from
Valparaiso by the Achille, one of the vessels of the squadron. The
animal, a remarkably fine one, had been taken ashore, and stabled in a
hut of cocoanut boughs within the fortified enclosure. Occasionally it
was brought out, and, being gaily caparisoned, was ridden by one of the
officers at full speed over the hard sand beach. This performance was
sure to be hailed with loud plaudits, and the ‘puarkee nuee’ (big hog)
was unanimously pronounced by the islanders to be the most extraordinary
specimen of zoology that had ever come under their observation.

The expedition for the occupation of the Marquesas had sailed from Brest
in the spring of 1842, and the secret of its destination was solely in
the possession of its commander. No wonder that those who contemplated
such a signal infraction of the rights of humanity should have sought to
veil the enormity from the eyes of the world. And yet, notwithstanding
their iniquitous conduct in this and in other matters, the French
have ever plumed themselves upon being the most humane and polished of
nations. A high degree of refinement, however, does not seem to subdue
our wicked propensities so much after all; and were civilization itself
to be estimated by some of its results, it would seem perhaps better for
what we call the barbarous part of the world to remain unchanged.

One example of the shameless subterfuges under which the French stand
prepared to defend whatever cruelties they may hereafter think fit to
commit in bringing the Marquesan natives into subjection is well worthy
of being recorded. On some flimsy pretext or other Mowanna, the king of
Nukuheva, whom the invaders by extravagant presents had cajoled over to
their interests, and moved about like a mere puppet, has been set up
as the rightful sovereign of the entire island--the alleged ruler by
prescription of various clans, who for ages perhaps have treated with
each other as separate nations. To reinstate this much-injured prince in
the assumed dignities of his ancestors, the disinterested strangers have
come all the way from France: they are determined that his title shall
be acknowledged. If any tribe shall refuse to recognize the authority
of the French, by bowing down to the laced chapeau of Mowanna, let them
abide the consequences of their obstinacy. Under cover of a similar
pretence, have the outrages and massacres at Tahiti the beautiful, the
queen of the South Seas, been perpetrated.

On this buccaneering expedition, Rear Admiral Du Petit Thouars, leaving
the rest of his squadron at the Marquesas,--which had then been occupied
by his forces about five months--set sail for the doomed island in
the Reine Blanche frigate. On his arrival, as an indemnity for alleged
insults offered to the flag of his country, he demanded some twenty
or thirty thousand dollars to be placed in his hands forthwith, and in
default of payment, threatened to land and take possession of the place.

The frigate, immediately upon coming to an anchor, got springs on her
cables, and with her guns cast loose and her men at their quarters, lay
in the circular basin of Papeete, with her broadside bearing upon the
devoted town; while her numerous cutters, hauled in order alongside,
were ready to effect a landing, under cover of her batteries. She
maintained this belligerent attitude for several days, during which time
a series of informal negotiations were pending, and wide alarm spread
over the island. Many of the Tahitians were at first disposed to resort
to arms, and drive the invaders from their shores; but more pacific and
feebler counsels ultimately prevailed. The unfortunate queen Pomare,
incapable of averting the impending calamity, terrified at the arrogance
of the insolent Frenchman, and driven at last to despair, fled by night
in a canoe to Emio.

During the continuance of the panic there occurred an instance of
feminine heroism that I cannot omit to record.

In the grounds of the famous missionary consul, Pritchard, then absent
in London, the consular flag of Britain waved as usual during the day,
from a lofty staff planted within a few yards of the beach, and in full
view of the frigate. One morning an officer, at the head of a party
of men, presented himself at the verandah of Mr Pritchard’s house, and
inquired in broken English for the lady his wife. The matron soon made
her appearance; and the polite Frenchman, making one of his best bows,
and playing gracefully with the aiguillettes that danced upon his
breast, proceeded in courteous accents to deliver his mission. ‘The
admiral desired the flag to be hauled down--hoped it would be perfectly
agreeable--and his men stood ready to perform the duty.’ ‘Tell the
Pirate your master,’ replied the spirited Englishwoman, pointing to
the staff, ‘that if he wishes to strike these colours, he must come and
perform the act himself; I will suffer no one else to do it.’ The lady
then bowed haughtily and withdrew into the house. As the discomfited
officer slowly walked away, he looked up to the flag, and perceived that
the cord by which it was elevated to its place, led from the top of the
staff, across the lawn, to an open upper window of the mansion, where
sat the lady from whom he had just parted, tranquilly engaged in
knitting. Was that flag hauled down? Mrs Pritchard thinks not; and
Rear-Admiral Du Petit Thouars is believed to be of the same opinion.




CHAPTER FOUR

STATE OF AFFAIRS ABOARD THE SHIP--CONTENTS OF HER LARDER--LENGTH OF
SOUTH SEAMEN’S VOYAGES--ACCOUNT OF A FLYING WHALE-MAN--DETERMINATION
TO LEAVE THE VESSEL--THE BAY OF NUKUHEVA--THE TYPEES--INVASION OF THEIR
VALLEY BY PORTER--REFLECTIONS--GLEN OF TIOR--INTERVIEW BETWEEN THE OLD
KING AND THE FRENCH ADMIRAL


Our ship had not been many days in the harbour of Nukuheva before I came
to the determination of leaving her. That my reasons for resolving to
take this step were numerous and weighty, may be inferred from the fact
that I chose rather to risk my fortunes among the savages of the island
than to endure another voyage on board the Dolly. To use the concise,
pointblank phrase of the sailors. I had made up my mind to ‘run away’.
Now as a meaning is generally attached to these two words no way
flattering to the individual to whom they are applied, it behoves
me, for the sake of my own character, to offer some explanation of my
conduct.

When I entered on board the Dolly, I signed as a matter of course the
ship’s articles, thereby voluntarily engaging and legally binding
myself to serve in a certain capacity for the period of the voyage;
and, special considerations apart, I was of course bound to fulfill the
agreement. But in all contracts, if one party fail to perform his share
of the compact, is not the other virtually absolved from his liability?
Who is there who will not answer in the affirmative?

Having settled the principle, then, let me apply it to the particular
case in question. In numberless instances had not only the implied but
the specified conditions of the articles been violated on the part of
the ship in which I served. The usage on board of her was tyrannical;
the sick had been inhumanly neglected; the provisions had been doled out
in scanty allowance; and her cruises were unreasonably protracted. The
captain was the author of the abuses; it was in vain to think that he
would either remedy them, or alter his conduct, which was arbitrary
and violent in the extreme. His prompt reply to all complaints and
remonstrances was--the butt-end of a handspike, so convincingly
administered as effectually to silence the aggrieved party.

To whom could we apply for redress? We had left both law and equity
on the other side of the Cape; and unfortunately, with a very few
exceptions, our crew was composed of a parcel of dastardly and
meanspirited wretches, divided among themselves, and only united in
enduring without resistance the unmitigated tyranny of the captain.
It would have been mere madness for any two or three of the number,
unassisted by the rest, to attempt making a stand against his ill
usage. They would only have called down upon themselves the particular
vengeance of this ‘Lord of the Plank’, and subjected their shipmates to
additional hardships.

But, after all, these things could have been endured awhile, had we
entertained the hope of being speedily delivered from them by the due
completion of the term of our servitude. But what a dismal prospect
awaited us in this quarter! The longevity of Cape Horn whaling voyages
is proverbial, frequently extending over a period of four or five years.

Some long-haired, bare-necked youths, who, forced by the united
influences of Captain Marryatt and hard times, embark at Nantucket for
a pleasure excursion to the Pacific, and whose anxious mothers provide
them, with bottled milk for the occasion, oftentimes return very
respectable middle-aged gentlemen.

The very preparations made for one of these expeditions are enough to
frighten one. As the vessel carries out no cargo, her hold is filled
with provisions for her own consumption. The owners, who officiate
as caterers for the voyage, supply the larder with an abundance
of dainties. Delicate morsels of beef and pork, cut on scientific
principles from every part of the animal, and of all conceivable shapes
and sizes, are carefully packed in salt, and stored away in barrels;
affording a never-ending variety in their different degrees of
toughness, and in the peculiarities of their saline properties. Choice
old water too, decanted into stout six-barrel-casks, and two pints of
which is allowed every day to each soul on board; together with ample
store of sea-bread, previously reduced to a state of petrifaction, with
a view to preserve it either from decay or consumption in the ordinary
mode, are likewise provided for the nourishment and gastronomic
enjoyment of the crew.

But not to speak of the quality of these articles of sailors’ fare,
the abundance in which they are put onboard a whaling vessel is almost
incredible. Oftentimes, when we had occasion to break out in the hold,
and I beheld the successive tiers of casks and barrels, whose contents
were all destined to be consumed in due course by the ship’s company, my
heart has sunk within me.

Although, as a general case, a ship unlucky in falling in with
whales continues to cruise after them until she has barely sufficient
provisions remaining to take her home, turning round then quietly and
making the best of her way to her friends, yet there are instances when
even this natural obstacle to the further prosecution of the voyage
is overcome by headstrong captains, who, bartering the fruits of their
hard-earned toils for a new supply of provisions in some of the ports
of Chili or Peru, begin the voyage afresh with unabated zeal and
perseverance. It is in vain that the owners write urgent letters to him
to sail for home, and for their sake to bring back the ship, since it
appears he can put nothing in her. Not he. He has registered a vow: he
will fill his vessel with good sperm oil, or failing to do so, never
again strike Yankee soundings.

I heard of one whaler, which after many years’ absence was given up for
lost. The last that had been heard of her was a shadowy report of her
having touched at some of those unstable islands in the far Pacific,
whose eccentric wanderings are carefully noted in each new edition
of the South-Sea charts. After a long interval, however, ‘The
Perseverance’--for that was her name--was spoken somewhere in the
vicinity of the ends of the earth, cruising along as leisurely as ever,
her sails all bepatched and be quilted with rope-yarns, her spars fished
with old pipe staves, and her rigging knotted and spliced in every
possible direction. Her crew was composed of some twenty venerable
Greenwich-pensioner-looking old salts, who just managed to hobble about
deck. The ends of all the running ropes, with the exception of the
signal halyards and poop-down-haul, were rove through snatch-blocks, and
led to the capstan or windlass, so that not a yard was braced or a sail
set without the assistance of machinery.

Her hull was encrusted with barnacles, which completely encased her.
Three pet sharks followed in her wake, and every day came alongside to
regale themselves from the contents of the cook’s bucket, which were
pitched over to them. A vast shoal of bonetas and albicores always kept
her company.

Such was the account I heard of this vessel and the remembrance of it
always haunted me; what eventually became of her I never learned; at
any rate: he never reached home, and I suppose she is still regularly
tacking twice in the twenty-four hours somewhere off Desolate Island, or
the Devil’s-Tail Peak.

Having said thus much touching the usual length of these voyages, when I
inform the reader that ours had as it were just commenced, we being only
fifteen months out, and even at that time hailed as a late arrival and
boarded for news, he will readily perceive that there was little to
encourage one in looking forward to the future, especially as I had
always had a presentiment that we should make an unfortunate voyage, and
our experience so far had justified the expectation.

I may here state, and on my faith as an honest man, that though more
than three years have elapsed since I left this same identical vessel,
she still continues; in the Pacific, and but a few days since I saw
her reported in the papers as having touched at the Sandwich Islands
previous to going on the coast of Japan.

But to return to my narrative. Placed in these circumstances then, with
no prospect of matters mending if I remained aboard the Dolly, I at once
made up my mind to leave her: to be sure it was rather an inglorious
thing to steal away privily from those at whose hands I had received
wrongs and outrages that I could not resent; but how was such a course
to be avoided when it was the only alternative left me? Having made
up my mind, I proceeded to acquire all the information I could obtain
relating to the island and its inhabitants, with a view of shaping my
plans of escape accordingly. The result of these inquiries I will now
state, in order that the ensuing narrative may be the better understood.

The bay of Nukuheva in which we were then lying is an expanse of
water not unlike in figure the space included within the limits of a
horse-shoe. It is, perhaps, nine miles in circumference. You approach
it from the sea by a narrow entrance, flanked on each side by two small
twin islets which soar conically to the height of some five hundred
feet. From these the shore recedes on both hands, and describes a deep
semicircle.

From the verge of the water the land rises uniformly on all sides, with
green and sloping acclivities, until from gently rolling hill-sides
and moderate elevations it insensibly swells into lofty and majestic
heights, whose blue outlines, ranged all around, close in the view. The
beautiful aspect of the shore is heightened by deep and romantic
glens, which come down to it at almost equal distances, all apparently
radiating from a common centre, and the upper extremities of which are
lost to the eye beneath the shadow of the mountains. Down each of these
little valleys flows a clear stream, here and there assuming the form
of a slender cascade, then stealing invisibly along until it bursts
upon the sight again in larger and more noisy waterfalls, and at last
demurely wanders along to the sea.

The houses of the natives, constructed of the yellow bamboo, tastefully
twisted together in a kind of wicker-work, and thatched with the long
tapering leaves of the palmetto, are scattered irregularly along these
valleys beneath the shady branches of the cocoanut trees.

Nothing can exceed the imposing scenery of this bay. Viewed from our
ship as she lay at anchor in the middle of the harbour, it presented the
appearance of a vast natural amphitheatre in decay, and overgrown with
vines, the deep glens that furrowed it’s sides appearing like enormous
fissures caused by the ravages of time. Very often when lost in
admiration at its beauty, I have experienced a pang of regret that a
scene so enchanting should be hidden from the world in these remote
seas, and seldom meet the eyes of devoted lovers of nature.

Besides this bay the shores of the island are indented by several other
extensive inlets, into which descend broad and verdant valleys. These
are inhabited by as many distinct tribes of savages, who, although
speaking kindred dialects of a common language, and having the same
religion and laws, have from time immemorial waged hereditary warfare
against each other. The intervening mountains generally two or three
thousand feet above the level of the sea geographically define the
territories of each of these hostile tribes, who never cross them, save
on some expedition of war or plunder. Immediately adjacent to Nukuheva,
and only separated from it by the mountains seen from the harbour, lies
the lovely valley of Happar, whose inmates cherish the most friendly
relations with the inhabitants of Nukuheva. On the other side of Happar,
and closely adjoining it, is the magnificent valley of the dreaded
Typees, the unappeasable enemies of both these tribes.

These celebrated warriors appear to inspire the other islanders with
unspeakable terrors. Their very name is a frightful one; for the word
‘Typee’ in the Marquesan dialect signifies a lover of human flesh. It
is rather singular that the title should have been bestowed upon them
exclusively, inasmuch as the natives of all this group are irreclaimable
cannibals. The name may, perhaps, have been given to denote the peculiar
ferocity of this clan, and to convey a special stigma along with it.

These same Typees enjoy a prodigious notoriety all over the islands. The
natives of Nukuheva would frequently recount in pantomime to our ship’s
company their terrible feats, and would show the marks of wounds they
had received in desperate encounters with them. When ashore they would
try to frighten us by pointing, to one of their own number, and calling
him a Typee, manifesting no little surprise that we did not take to our
heels at so terrible an announcement. It was quite amusing, too, to see
with what earnestness they disclaimed all cannibal propensities on their
own part, while they denounced their enemies--the Typees--as inveterate
gourmandizers of human flesh; but this is a peculiarity to which I shall
hereafter have occasion to allude.

Although I was convinced that the inhabitants of our bay were as arrant
cannibals as any of the other tribes on the island, still I could not
but feel a particular and most unqualified repugnance to the aforesaid
Typees. Even before visiting the Marquesas, I had heard from men who
had touched at the group on former voyages some revolting stories in
connection with these savages; and fresh in my remembrance was the
adventure of the master of the Katherine, who only a few months
previous, imprudently venturing into this bay in an armed boat for the
purpose of barter, was seized by the natives, carried back a little
distance into their valley, and was only saved from a cruel death by the
intervention of a young girl, who facilitated his escape by night along
the beach to Nukuheva.

I had heard too of an English vessel that many years ago, after a weary
cruise, sought to enter the bay of Nukuheva, and arriving within two or
three miles of the land, was met by a large canoe filled with natives,
who offered to lead the way to the place of their destination. The
captain, unacquainted with the localities of the island, joyfully
acceded to the proposition--the canoe paddled on, the ship followed. She
was soon conducted to a beautiful inlet, and dropped her anchor in
its waters beneath the shadows of the lofty shore. That same night the
perfidious Typees, who had thus inveigled her into their fatal bay,
flocked aboard the doomed vessel by hundreds, and at a given signal
murdered every soul on board.

I shall never forget the observation of one of our crew as we were
passing slowly by the entrance of the bay in our way to Nukuheva. As we
stood gazing over the side at the verdant headlands, Ned, pointing
with his hand in the direction of the treacherous valley, exclaimed,
‘There--there’s Typee. Oh, the bloody cannibals, what a meal they’d make
of us if we were to take it into our heads to land! but they say they
don’t like sailor’s flesh, it’s too salt. I say, maty, how should you
like to be shoved ashore there, eh?’ I little thought, as I shuddered
at the question, that in the space of a few weeks I should actually be a
captive in that self-same valley.

The French, although they had gone through the ceremony of hoisting
their colours for a few hours at all the principal places of the
group, had not as yet visited the bay of Typee, anticipating a fierce
resistance on the part of the savages there, which for the present at
least they wished to avoid. Perhaps they were not a little influenced in
the adoption of this unusual policy from a recollection of the warlike
reception given by the Typees to the forces of Captain Porter, about
the year 1814, when that brave and accomplished officer endeavoured to
subjugate the clan merely to gratify the mortal hatred of his allies the
Nukuhevas and Happars.

On that occasion I have been told that a considerable detachment of
sailors and marines from the frigate Essex, accompanied by at least two
thousand warriors of Happar and Nukuheva, landed in boats and canoes at
the head of the bay, and after penetrating a little distance into the
valley, met with the stoutest resistance from its inmates. Valiantly,
although with much loss, the Typees disputed every inch of ground, and
after some hard fighting obliged their assailants to retreat and abandon
their design of conquest.

The invaders, on their march back to the sea, consoled themselves for
their repulse by setting fire to every house and temple in their route;
and a long line of smoking ruins defaced the once-smiling bosom of the
valley, and proclaimed to its pagan inhabitants the spirit that reigned
in the breasts of Christian soldiers. Who can wonder at the deadly
hatred of the Typees to all foreigners after such unprovoked atrocities?

Thus it is that they whom we denominate ‘savages’ are made to deserve
the title. When the inhabitants of some sequestered island first descry
the ‘big canoe’ of the European rolling through the blue waters towards
their shores, they rush down to the beach in crowds, and with open arms
stand ready to embrace the strangers. Fatal embrace! They fold to their
bosom the vipers whose sting is destined to poison all their joys; and
the instinctive feeling of love within their breast is soon converted
into the bitterest hate.

The enormities perpetrated in the South Seas upon some of the
inoffensive islanders will nigh pass belief. These things are seldom
proclaimed at home; they happen at the very ends of the earth; they
are done in a corner, and there are none to reveal them. But there is,
nevertheless, many a petty trader that has navigated the Pacific whose
course from island to island might be traced by a series of cold-blooded
robberies, kidnappings, and murders, the iniquity of which might be
considered almost sufficient to sink her guilty timbers to the bottom of
the sea.

Sometimes vague accounts of such thing’s reach our firesides, and
we coolly censure them as wrong, impolitic, needlessly severe, and
dangerous to the crews of other vessels. How different is our tone when
we read the highly-wrought description of the massacre of the crew of
the Hobomak by the Feejees; how we sympathize for the unhappy victims,
and with what horror do we regard the diabolical heathens, who, after
all, have but avenged the unprovoked injuries which they have received.
We breathe nothing but vengeance, and equip armed vessels to traverse
thousands of miles of ocean in order to execute summary punishment upon
the offenders. On arriving at their destination, they burn, slaughter,
and destroy, according to the tenor of written instructions, and sailing
away from the scene of devastation, call upon all Christendom to applaud
their courage and their justice.

How often is the term ‘savages’ incorrectly applied! None really
deserving of it were ever yet discovered by voyagers or by travellers.
They have discovered heathens and barbarians whom by horrible cruelties
they have exasperated into savages. It may be asserted without fear
of contradictions that in all the cases of outrages committed by
Polynesians, Europeans have at some time or other been the aggressors,
and that the cruel and bloodthirsty disposition of some of the islanders
is mainly to be ascribed to the influence of such examples.

But to return. Owing to the mutual hostilities of the different tribes
I have mentioned, the mountainous tracts which separate their respective
territories remain altogether uninhabited; the natives invariably
dwelling in the depths of the valleys, with a view of securing
themselves from the predatory incursions of their enemies, who often
lurk along their borders, ready to cut off any imprudent straggler,
or make a descent upon the inmates of some sequestered habitation. I
several times met with very aged men, who from this cause had never
passed the confines of their native vale, some of them having never even
ascended midway up the mountains in the whole course of their lives, and
who, accordingly had little idea of the appearance of any other part of
the island, the whole of which is not perhaps more than sixty miles in
circuit. The little space in which some of these clans pass away their
days would seem almost incredible.

The glen of the Tior will furnish a curious illustration of this.

The inhabited part is not more than four miles in length, and varies
in breadth from half a mile to less than a quarter. The rocky vine-clad
cliffs on one side tower almost perpendicularly from their base to
the height of at least fifteen hundred feet; while across the vale--in
striking contrast to the scenery opposite--grass-grown elevations rise
one above another in blooming terraces. Hemmed in by these stupendous
barriers, the valley would be altogether shut out from the rest of the
world, were it not that it is accessible from the sea at one end, and by
a narrow defile at the other.

The impression produced upon the mind, when I first visited this
beautiful glen, will never be obliterated.

I had come from Nukuheva by water in the ship’s boat, and when we
entered the bay of Tior it was high noon. The heat had been intense, as
we had been floating upon the long smooth swell of the ocean, for there
was but little wind. The sun’s rays had expended all their fury upon us;
and to add to our discomfort, we had omitted to supply ourselves with
water previous to starting. What with heat and thirst together, I became
so impatient to get ashore, that when at last we glided towards it,
I stood up in the bow of the boat ready for a spring. As she shot
two-thirds of her length high upon the beach, propelled by three or four
strong strokes of the oars, I leaped among a parcel of juvenile savages,
who stood prepared to give us a kind reception; and with them at my
heels, yelling like so many imps, I rushed forward across the open
ground in the vicinity of the sea, and plunged, diver fashion, into the
recesses of the first grove that offered.

What a delightful sensation did I experience! I felt as if floating in
some new element, while all sort of gurgling, trickling, liquid sounds
fell upon my ear. People may say what they will about the refreshing
influences of a coldwater bath, but commend me when in a perspiration to
the shade baths of Tior, beneath the cocoanut trees, and amidst the cool
delightful atmosphere which surrounds them.

How shall I describe the scenery that met my eye, as I looked out
from this verdant recess! The narrow valley, with its steep and close
adjoining sides draperied with vines, and arched overhead with a
fret-work of interlacing boughs, nearly hidden from view by masses
of leafy verdure, seemed from where I stood like an immense arbour
disclosing its vista to the eye, whilst as I advanced it insensibly
widened into the loveliest vale eye ever beheld.

It so happened that the very day I was in Tior the French admiral,
attended by all the boats of his squadron, came down in state from
Nukuheva to take formal possession of the place. He remained in the
valley about two hours, during which time he had a ceremonious interview
with the king. The patriarch-sovereign of Tior was a man very far
advanced in years; but though age had bowed his form and rendered him
almost decrepid, his gigantic frame retained its original magnitude and
grandeur of appearance.

He advanced slowly and with evident pain, assisting his tottering steps
with the heavy warspear he held in his hand, and attended by a group of
grey-bearded chiefs, on one of whom he occasionally leaned for support.
The admiral came forward with head uncovered and extended hand, while
the old king saluted him by a stately flourish of his weapon. The
next moment they stood side by side, these two extremes of the social
scale,--the polished, splendid Frenchman, and the poor tattooed savage.
They were both tall and noble-looking men; but in other respects how
strikingly contrasted! Du Petit Thouars exhibited upon his person
all the paraphernalia of his naval rank. He wore a richly decorated
admiral’s frock-coat, a laced chapeau bras, and upon his breast were
a variety of ribbons and orders; while the simple islander, with the
exception of a slight cincture about his loins, appeared in all the
nakedness of nature.

At what an immeasurable distance, thought I, are these two beings
removed from each other. In the one is shown the result of long
centuries of progressive Civilization and refinement, which have
gradually converted the mere creature into the semblance of all that is
elevated and grand; while the other, after the lapse of the same period,
has not advanced one step in the career of improvement, ‘Yet, after
all,’ quoth I to myself, ‘insensible as he is to a thousand wants, and
removed from harassing cares, may not the savage be the happier man of
the two?’ Such were the thoughts that arose in my mind as I gazed upon
the novel spectacle before me. In truth it was an impressive one,
and little likely to be effaced. I can recall even now with vivid
distinctness every feature of the scene. The umbrageous shades where
the interview took place--the glorious tropical vegetation around--the
picturesque grouping of the mingled throng of soldiery and natives--and
even the golden-hued bunch of bananas that I held in my hand at the
time, and of which I occasionally partook while making the aforesaid
philosophical reflections.




CHAPTER FIVE

THOUGHTS PREVIOUS TO ATTEMPTING AN ESCAPE--TOBY, A FELLOW SAILOR, AGREES
TO SHARE THE ADVENTURE--LAST NIGHT ABOARD THE SHIP


Having fully resolved to leave the vessel clandestinely, and having
acquired all the knowledge concerning the bay that I could obtain under
the circumstances in which I was placed, I now deliberately turned over
in my mind every plan to escape that suggested itself, being determined
to act with all possible prudence in an attempt where failure would be
attended with so many disagreeable consequences. The idea of being
taken and brought back ignominiously to the ship was so inexpressibly
repulsive to me, that I was determined by no hasty and imprudent
measures to render such an event probable.

I knew that our worthy captain, who felt, such a paternal solicitude
for the welfare of his crew, would not willingly consent that one of his
best hands should encounter the perils of a sojourn among the natives
of a barbarous island; and I was certain that in the event of my
disappearance, his fatherly anxiety would prompt him to offer, by way of
a reward, yard upon yard of gaily printed calico for my apprehension.
He might even have appreciated my services at the value of a musket, in
which case I felt perfectly certain that the whole population of the
bay would be immediately upon my track, incited by the prospect of so
magnificent a bounty.

Having ascertained the fact before alluded to, that the islanders,--from
motives of precaution, dwelt altogether in the depths of the valleys,
and avoided wandering about the more elevated portions of the shore,
unless bound on some expedition of war or plunder, I concluded that if
I could effect unperceived a passage to the mountain, I might easily
remain among them, supporting myself by such fruits as came in my way
until the sailing of the ship, an event of which I could not fail to be
immediately apprised, as from my lofty position I should command a view
of the entire harbour.

The idea pleased me greatly. It seemed to combine a great deal of
practicability with no inconsiderable enjoyment in a quiet way; for how
delightful it would be to look down upon the detested old vessel from
the height of some thousand feet, and contrast the verdant scenery about
me with the recollection of her narrow decks and gloomy forecastle! Why,
it was really refreshing even to think of it; and so I straightway fell
to picturing myself seated beneath a cocoanut tree on the brow of the
mountain, with a cluster of plantains within easy reach, criticizing her
nautical evolutions as she was working her way out of the harbour.

To be sure there was one rather unpleasant drawback to these agreeable
anticipations--the possibility of falling in with a foraging party of
these same bloody-minded Typees, whose appetites, edged perhaps by the
air of so elevated a region, might prompt them to devour one. This, I
must confess, was a most disagreeable view of the matter.

Just to think of a party of these unnatural gourmands taking it into
their heads to make a convivial meal of a poor devil, who would have
no means of escape or defence: however, there was no help for it. I was
willing to encounter some risks in order to accomplish my object, and
counted much upon my ability to elude these prowling cannibals amongst
the many coverts which the mountains afforded. Besides, the chances
were ten to one in my favour that they would none of them quit their own
fastnesses.

I had determined not to communicate my design of withdrawing from the
vessel to any of my shipmates, and least of all to solicit any one to
accompany me in my flight. But it so happened one night, that being upon
deck, revolving over in my mind various plans of escape, I perceived one
of the ship’s company leaning over the bulwarks, apparently plunged in a
profound reverie. He was a young fellow about my own age, for whom I
had all along entertained a great regard; and Toby, such was the name
by which he went among us, for his real name he would never tell us, was
every way worthy of it. He was active, ready and obliging, of dauntless
courage, and singularly open and fearless in the expression of his
feelings. I had on more than one occasion got him out of scrapes into
which this had led him; and I know not whether it was from this cause,
or a certain congeniality of sentiment between us, that he had always
shown a partiality for my society. We had battled out many a long watch
together, beguiling the weary hours with chat, song, and story, mingled
with a good many imprecations upon the hard destiny it seemed our common
fortune to encounter.

Toby, like myself, had evidently moved in a different sphere of life,
and his conversation at times betrayed this, although he was anxious
to conceal it. He was one of that class of rovers you sometimes meet
at sea, who never reveal their origin, never allude to home, and go
rambling over the world as if pursued by some mysterious fate they
cannot possibly elude.

There was much even in the appearance of Toby calculated to draw me
towards him, for while the greater part of the crew were as coarse in
person as in mind, Toby was endowed with a remarkably prepossessing
exterior. Arrayed in his blue frock and duck trousers, he was as smart a
looking sailor as ever stepped upon a deck; he was singularly small
and slightly made, with great flexibility of limb. His naturally dark
complexion had been deepened by exposure to the tropical sun, and a mass
of jetty locks clustered about his temples, and threw a darker shade
into his large black eyes. He was a strange wayward being, moody,
fitful, and melancholy--at times almost morose. He had a quick and fiery
temper too, which, when thoroughly roused, transported him into a state
bordering on delirium.

It is strange the power that a mind of deep passion has over feebler
natures. I have seen a brawny, fellow, with no lack of ordinary courage,
fairly quail before this slender stripling, when in one of his curious
fits. But these paroxysms seldom occurred, and in them my big-hearted
shipmate vented the bile which more calm-tempered individuals get rid of
by a continual pettishness at trivial annoyances.

No one ever saw Toby laugh. I mean in the hearty abandonment of
broad-mouthed mirth. He did smile sometimes, it is true; and there was
a good deal of dry, sarcastic humour about him, which told the more from
the imperturbable gravity of his tone and manner.

Latterly I had observed that Toby’s melancholy had greatly increased,
and I had frequently seen him since our arrival at the island gazing
wistfully upon the shore, when the remainder of the crew would be
rioting below. I was aware that he entertained a cordial detestation
of the ship, and believed that, should a fair chance of escape present
itself, he would embrace it willingly.

But the attempt was so perilous in the place where we then lay, that
I supposed myself the only individual on board the ship who was
sufficiently reckless to think of it. In this, however, I was mistaken.

When I perceived Toby leaning, as I have mentioned, against the bulwarks
and buried in thought, it struck me at once that the subject of his
meditations might be the same as my own. And if it be so, thought I,
is he not the very one of all my shipmates whom I would choose: for the
partner of my adventure? and why should I not have some comrade with me
to divide its dangers and alleviate its hardships? Perhaps I might be
obliged to lie concealed among the mountains for weeks. In such an event
what a solace would a companion be?

These thoughts passed rapidly through my mind, and I wondered why I had
not before considered the matter in this light. But it was not too late.
A tap upon the shoulder served to rouse Toby from his reverie; I found
him ripe for the enterprise, and a very few words sufficed for a mutual
understanding between us. In an hour’s time we had arranged all the
preliminaries, and decided upon our plan of action. We then ratified our
engagement with an affectionate wedding of palms, and to elude suspicion
repaired each to his hammock, to spend the last night on board the
Dolly.

The next day the starboard watch, to which we both belonged, was to be
sent ashore on liberty; and, availing ourselves of this opportunity,
we determined, as soon after landing as possible, to separate ourselves
from the rest of the men without exciting their suspicions, and strike
back at once for the mountains. Seen from the ship, their summits
appeared inaccessible, but here and there sloping spurs extended from
them almost into the sea, buttressing the lofty elevations with which
they were connected, and forming those radiating valleys I have before
described. One of these ridges, which appeared more practicable than the
rest, we determined to climb, convinced that it would conduct us to
the heights beyond. Accordingly, we carefully observed its bearings and
locality from the ship, so that when ashore we should run no chance of
missing it.

In all this the leading object we had in view was to seclude ourselves
from sight until the departure of the vessel; then to take our chance as
to the reception the Nukuheva natives might give us; and after remaining
upon the island as long as we found our stay agreeable, to leave it the
first favourable opportunity that offered.




CHAPTER SIX

A SPECIMEN OF NAUTICAL ORATORY--CRITICISMS OF THE SAILORS--THE STARBOARD
WATCH ARE GIVEN A HOLIDAY--THE ESCAPE TO THE MOUNTAINS


Early the next morning the starboard watch were mustered upon the
quarter-deck, and our worthy captain, standing in the cabin gangway,
harangued us as follows:--

‘Now, men, as we are just off a six months’ cruise, and have got through
most all our work in port here, I suppose you want to go ashore. Well, I
mean to give your watch liberty today, so you may get ready as soon all
you please, and go; but understand this, I am going to give you liberty
because I suppose you would growl like so many old quarter gunners if I
didn’t; at the same time, if you’ll take my advice, every mother’s son
of you will stay aboard and keep out of the way of the bloody cannibals
altogether. Ten to one, men, if you go ashore, you will get into some
infernal row, and that will be the end of you; for if those tattooed
scoundrels get you a little ways back into their valleys, they’ll nab
you--that you may be certain of. Plenty of white men have gone ashore
here and never been seen any more. There was the old Dido, she put in
here about two years ago, and sent one watch off on liberty; they never
were heard of again for a week--the natives swore they didn’t know where
they were--and only three of them ever got back to the ship again, and
one with his face damaged for life, for the cursed heathens tattooed a
broad patch clean across his figure-head. But it will be no use talking
to you, for go you will, that I see plainly; so all I have to say is,
that you need not blame me if the islanders make a meal of you. You may
stand some chance of escaping them though, if you keep close about the
French encampment,--and are back to the ship again before sunset. Keep
that much in your mind, if you forget all the rest I’ve been saying to
you. There, go forward: bear a hand and rig yourselves, and stand by for
a call. At two bells the boat will be manned to take you off, and the
Lord have mercy on you!’

Various were the emotions depicted upon the countenances of the
starboard watch whilst listening to this address; but on its conclusion
there was a general move towards the forecastle, and we soon were
all busily engaged in getting ready for the holiday so auspiciously
announced by the skipper. During these preparations his harangue was
commented upon in no very measured terms; and one of the party, after
denouncing him as a lying old son of a seacook who begrudged a fellow a
few hours’ liberty, exclaimed with an oath, ‘But you don’t bounce me out
of my liberty, old chap, for all your yarns; for I would go ashore if
every pebble on the beach was a live coal, and every stick a gridiron,
and the cannibals stood ready to broil me on landing.’

The spirit of this sentiment was responded to by all hands, and we
resolved that in spite of the captain’s croakings we would make a
glorious day of it.

But Toby and I had our own game to play, and we availed ourselves of
the confusion which always reigns among a ship’s company preparatory to
going ashore, to confer together and complete our arrangements. As our
object was to effect as rapid a flight as possible to the mountains, we
determined not to encumber ourselves with any superfluous apparel; and
accordingly, while the rest were rigging themselves out with some idea
of making a display, we were content to put on new stout duck trousers,
serviceable pumps, and heavy Havre-frocks, which with a Payta hat
completed our equipment.

When our shipmates wondered at this, Toby exclaimed in his odd grave way
that the rest might do, as they liked, but that he for one preserved
his go-ashore traps for the Spanish main, where the tie of a sailor’s
neckerchief might make some difference; but as for a parcel of
unbreeched heathen, he wouldn’t go to the bottom of his chest for any
of them, and was half disposed to appear among them in buff himself. The
men laughed at what they thought was one of his strange conceits, and so
we escaped suspicion.

It may appear singular that we should have been thus on our guard with
our own shipmates; but there were some among us who, had they possessed
the least inkling of our project, would, for a paltry hope of reward,
have immediately communicated it to the captain.

As soon as two bells were struck, the word was passed for the
liberty-men to get into the boat. I lingered behind in the forecastle a
moment to take a parting glance at its familiar features, and just as
I was about to ascend to the deck my eye happened to light on the
bread-barge and beef-kid, which contained the remnants of our last hasty
meal. Although I had never before thought of providing anything in the
way of food for our expedition, as I fully relied upon the fruits of the
island to sustain us wherever we might wander, yet I could not resist
the inclination I felt to provide luncheon from the relics before me.
Accordingly I took a double handful of those small, broken, flinty bits
of biscuit which generally go by the name of ‘midshipmen’s nuts’, and
thrust them into the bosom of my frock in which same simple receptacle I
had previously stowed away several pounds of tobacco and a few yards of
cotton cloth--articles with which I intended to purchase the good-will
of the natives, as soon as we should appear among them after the
departure of our vessel.

This last addition to my stock caused a considerable protuberance in
front, which I abated in a measure by shaking the bits of bread around
my waist, and distributing the plugs of tobacco among the folds of the
garment.

Hardly had I completed these arrangements when my name was sung out by a
dozen voices, and I sprung upon the deck, where I found all the party in
the boat, and impatient to shove off. I dropped over the side and seated
myself with the rest of the watch in the stern sheets, while the poor
larboarders shipped their oars, and commenced pulling us ashore.

This happened to be the rainy season at the islands, and the heavens
had nearly the whole morning betokened one of those heavy showers which
during this period so frequently occur. The large drops fell bubbling
into the water shortly after our leaving the ship, and by the time we
had affected a landing it poured down in torrents. We fled for shelter
under cover of an immense canoe-house which stood hard by the beach, and
waited for the first fury of the storm to pass.

It continued, however, without cessation; and the monotonous beating of
the rain over head began to exert a drowsy influence upon the men, who,
throwing themselves here and there upon the large war-canoes, after
chatting awhile, all fell asleep.

This was the opportunity we desired, and Toby and I availed ourselves
of it at once by stealing out of the canoe-house and plunging into the
depths of an extensive grove that was in its rear. After ten minutes’
rapid progress we gained an open space from which we could just descry
the ridge we intended to mount looming dimly through the mists of the
tropical shower, and distant from us, as we estimated, something more
than a mile. Our direct course towards it lay through a rather populous
part of the bay; but desirous as we were of evading the natives and
securing an unmolested retreat to the mountains, we determined, by
taking a circuit through some extensive thickets, to avoid their
vicinity altogether.

The heavy rain that still continued to fall without intermission
favoured our enterprise, as it drove the islanders into their houses,
and prevented any casual meeting with them. Our heavy frocks soon became
completely saturated with water, and by their weight, and that of
the articles we had concealed beneath them, not a little impeded our
progress. But it was no time to pause when at any moment we might be
surprised by a body of the savages, and forced at the very outset to
relinquish our undertaking.

Since leaving the canoe-house we had scarcely exchanged a single
syllable with one another; but when we entered a second narrow opening
in the wood, and again caught sight of the ridge before us, I took Toby
by the arm, and pointing along its sloping outline to the lofty heights
at its extremity, said in a low tone, ‘Now, Toby, not a word, nor a
glance backward, till we stand on the summit of yonder mountain--so no
more lingering but let us shove ahead while we can, and in a few hours’
time we may laugh aloud. You are the lightest and the nimblest, so lead
on, and I will follow.’

‘All right, brother,’ said Toby, ‘quick’s our play; only lets keep close
together, that’s all;’ and so saying with a bound like a young roe, he
cleared a brook which ran across our path, and rushed forward with a
quick step.

When we arrived within a short distance of the ridge, we were stopped by
a mass of tall yellow reeds, growing together as thickly as they could
stand, and as tough and stubborn as so many rods of steel; and we
perceived, to our chagrin, that they extended midway up the elevation we
proposed to ascend.

For a moment we gazed about us in quest of a more practicable route; it
was, however, at once apparent that there was no resource but to pierce
this thicket of canes at all hazards. We now reversed our order of
march, I, being the heaviest, taking the lead, with a view of breaking a
path through the obstruction, while Toby fell into the rear.

Two or three times I endeavoured to insinuate myself between the canes,
and by dint of coaxing and bending them to make some progress; but a
bull-frog might as well have tried to work a passage through the teeth
of a comb, and I gave up the attempt in despair.

Half wild with meeting an obstacle we had so little anticipated, I threw
myself desperately against it, crushing to the ground the canes with
which I came in contact, and, rising to my feet again, repeated the
action with like effect. Twenty minutes of this violent exercise almost
exhausted me, but it carried us some way into the thicket; when Toby,
who had been reaping the benefit of my labours by following close at my
heels, proposed to become pioneer in turn, and accordingly passed ahead
with a view of affording me a respite from my exertions. As however
with his slight frame he made but bad work of it, I was soon obliged to
resume my old place again. On we toiled, the perspiration starting from
our bodies in floods, our limbs torn and lacerated with the splintered
fragments of the broken canes, until we had proceeded perhaps as far
as the middle of the brake, when suddenly it ceased raining, and the
atmosphere around us became close and sultry beyond expression. The
elasticity of the reeds quickly recovering from the temporary pressure
of our bodies, caused them to spring back to their original position;
so that they closed in upon us as we advanced, and prevented the
circulation of little air which might otherwise have reached us.
Besides this, their great height completely shut us out from the view of
surrounding objects, and we were not certain but that we might have been
going all the time in a wrong direction.

Fatigued with my long-continued efforts, and panting for breath, I felt
myself completely incapacitated for any further exertion. I rolled up
the sleeve of my frock, and squeezed the moisture it contained into
my parched mouth. But the few drops I managed to obtain gave me little
relief, and I sank down for a moment with a sort of dogged apathy, from
which I was aroused by Toby, who had devised a plan to free us from the
net in which we had become entangled.

He was laying about him lustily with his sheath-knive, lopping the canes
right and left, like a reaper, and soon made quite a clearing around us.
This sight reanimated me; and seizing my own knife, I hacked and hewed
away without mercy. But alas! the farther we advanced the thicker and
taller, and apparently the more interminable, the reeds became.

I began to think we were fairly snared, and had almost made up my mind
that without a pair of wings we should never be able to escape from the
toils; when all at once I discerned a peep of daylight through the canes
on my right, and, communicating the joyful tidings to Toby, we both fell
to with fresh spirit, and speedily opening the passage towards it we
found ourselves clear of perplexities, and in the near vicinity of the
ridge. After resting for a few moments we began the ascent, and after
a little vigorous climbing found ourselves close to its summit. Instead
however of walking along its ridge, where we should have been in full
view of the natives in the vales beneath, and at a point where they
could easily intercept us were they so inclined, we cautiously advanced
on one side, crawling on our hands and knees, and screened from
observation by the grass through which we glided, much in the fashion of
a couple of serpents. After an hour employed in this unpleasant kind
of locomotion, we started to our feet again and pursued our way boldly
along the crest of the ridge.

This salient spur of the lofty elevations that encompassed the bay rose
with a sharp angle from the valleys at its base, and presented, with the
exception of a few steep acclivities, the appearance of a vast inclined
plane, sweeping down towards the sea from the heights in the distance.
We had ascended it near the place of its termination and at its lowest
point, and now saw our route to the mountains distinctly defined along
its narrow crest, which was covered with a soft carpet of verdure, and
was in many parts only a few feet wide.

Elated with the success which had so far attended our enterprise, and
invigorated by the refreshing atmosphere we now inhaled, Toby and I in
high spirits were making our way rapidly along the ridge, when suddenly
from the valleys below which lay on either side of us we heard the
distant shouts of the natives, who had just descried us, and to whom our
figures, brought in bold relief against the sky, were plainly revealed.

Glancing our eyes into these valleys, we perceived their savage
inhabitants hurrying to and fro, seemingly under the influence of some
sudden alarm, and appearing to the eye scarcely bigger than so many
pigmies; while their white thatched dwellings, dwarfed by the distance,
looked like baby-houses. As we looked down upon the islanders from our
lofty elevation, we experienced a sense of security; feeling confident
that, should they undertake a pursuit, it would, from the start we
now had, prove entirely fruitless, unless they followed us into the
mountains, where we knew they cared not to venture.

However, we thought it as well to make the most of our time; and
accordingly, where the ground would admit of it, we ran swiftly along
the summit of the ridge, until we were brought to a stand by a steep
cliff, which at first seemed to interpose an effectual barrier to our
farther advance. By dint of much hard scrambling however, and at some
risk to our necks, we at last surmounted it, and continued our fight
with unabated celerity.

We had left the beach early in the morning, and after an uninterrupted,
though at times difficult and dangerous ascent, during which we had
never once turned our faces to the sea, we found ourselves, about
three hours before sunset, standing on the top of what seemed to be the
highest land on the island, an immense overhanging cliff composed of
basaltic rocks, hung round with parasitical plants. We must have been
more than three thousand feet above the level of the sea, and the
scenery viewed from this height was magnificent.

The lonely bay of Nukuheva, dotted here and there with the black hulls
of the vessels composing the French squadron, lay reposing at the base
of a circular range of elevations, whose verdant sides, perforated with
deep glens or diversified with smiling valleys, formed altogether the
loveliest view I ever beheld, and were I to live a hundred years, I
shall never forget the feeling of admiration which I then experienced.




CHAPTER SEVEN

THE OTHER SIDE OF THE MOUNTAIN--DISAPPOINTMENT--INVENTORY OF ARTICLES
BROUGHT FROM THE SHIP--DIVISION OF THE STOCK OF BREAD--APPEARANCE OF
THE INTERIOR OF THE ISLAND--A DISCOVERY--A RAVINE AND WATERFALLS--A
SLEEPLESS NIGHT--FURTHER DISCOVERIES--MY ILLNESS--A MARQUESAN LANDSCAPE


My curiosity had been not a little raised with regard to the description
of country we should meet on the other side of the mountains; and I had
supposed, with Toby, that immediately on gaining the heights we should
be enabled to view the large bays of Happar and Typee reposing at our
feet on one side, in the same way that Nukuheva lay spread out below
on the other. But here we were disappointed. Instead of finding the
mountain we had ascended sweeping down in the opposite direction into
broad and capacious valleys, the land appeared to retain its general
elevation, only broken into a series of ridges and inter-vales which
so far as the eye could reach stretched away from us, with their
precipitous sides covered with the brightest verdure, and waving here
and there with the foliage of clumps of woodland; among which, however,
we perceived none of those trees upon whose fruit we had relied with
such certainty.

This was a most unlooked-for discovery, and one that promised to defeat
our plans altogether, for we could not think of descending the mountain
on the Nukuheva side in quest of food. Should we for this purpose
be induced to retrace our steps, we should run no small chance of
encountering the natives, who in that case, if they did nothing worse to
us, would be certain to convey us back to the ship for the sake of the
reward in calico and trinkets, which we had no doubt our skipper would
hold out to them as an inducement to our capture.

What was to be done? The Dolly would not sail perhaps for ten days, and
how were we to sustain life during this period? I bitterly repented our
improvidence in not providing ourselves, as we easily might have done,
with a supply of biscuits. With a rueful visage I now bethought me of
the scanty handful of bread I had stuffed into the bosom of my frock,
and felt somewhat desirous to ascertain what part of it had weathered
the rather rough usage it had experienced in ascending the mountain.
I accordingly proposed to Toby that we should enter into a joint
examination of the various articles we had brought from the ship.

With this intent we seated ourselves upon the grass; and a little
curious to see with what kind of judgement my companion had filled
his frock--which I remarked seemed about as well lined as my own--I
requested him to commence operations by spreading out its contents.

Thrusting his hand, then, into the bosom of this capacious receptacle,
he first brought to light about a pound of tobacco, whose component
parts still adhered together, the whole outside being covered with
soft particles of sea-bread. Wet and dripping, it had the appearance of
having been just recovered from the bottom of the sea. But I paid
slight attention to a substance of so little value to us in our present
situation, as soon as I perceived the indications it gave of Toby’s
foresight in laying in a supply of food for the expedition.

I eagerly inquired what quantity he had brought with him, when rummaging
once more beneath his garment, he produced a small handful of something
so soft, pulpy, and discoloured, that for a few moments he was as
much puzzled as myself to tell by what possible instrumentality such
a villainous compound had become engendered in his bosom. I can only
describe it as a hash of soaked bread and bits of tobacco, brought to
a doughy consistency by the united agency of perspiration and rain.
But repulsive as it might otherwise have been, I now regarded it as
an invaluable treasure, and proceeded with great care to transfer this
paste-like mass to a large leaf which I had plucked from a bush beside
me. Toby informed me that in the morning he had placed two whole
biscuits in his bosom, with a view of munching them, should he feel so
inclined, during our flight. These were now reduced to the equivocal
substance which I had just placed on the leaf.

Another dive into the frock brought to view some four or five yards of
calico print, whose tasteful pattern was rather disfigured by the yellow
stains of the tobacco with which it had been brought in contact. In
drawing this calico slowly from his bosom inch by inch, Toby reminded
me of a juggler performing the feat of the endless ribbon. The next
cast was a small one, being a sailor’s little ‘ditty bag’, containing
needles, thread, and other sewing utensils, then came a razor-case,
followed by two or three separate plugs of negro-head, which were fished
up from the bottom of the now empty receptacle. These various matters,
being inspected, I produced the few things which I had myself brought.

As might have been anticipated from the state of my companion’s edible
supplies, I found my own in a deplorable condition, and diminished to a
quantity that would not have formed half a dozen mouthfuls for a hungry
man who was partial enough to tobacco not to mind swallowing it. A
few morsels of bread, with a fathom or two of white cotton cloth, and
several pounds of choice pigtail, composed the extent of my possessions.

Our joint stock of miscellaneous articles were now made up into a
compact bundle, which it was agreed we should carry alternately. But the
sorry remains of the biscuit were not to be disposed of so summarily:
the precarious circumstances in which we were placed made us regard them
as something on which very probably, depended the fate of our adventure.
After a brief discussion, in which we both of us expressed our
resolution of not descending into the bay until the ship’s departure,
I suggested to my companion that little of it as there was, we should
divide the bread into six equal portions, each of which should be a
day’s allowance for both of us. This proposition he assented to; so I
took the silk kerchief from my neck, and cutting it with my knife into
half a dozen equal pieces, proceeded to make an exact division.

At first, Toby with a degree of fastidiousness that seemed to me
ill-timed, was for picking out the minute particles of tobacco
with which the spongy mass was mixed; but against this proceeding I
protested, as by such an operation we must have greatly diminished its
quantity.

When the division was accomplished, we found that a day’s allowance for
the two was not a great deal more than what a table-spoon might hold.
Each separate portion we immediately rolled up in the bit of silk
prepared for it, and joining them all together into a small package, I
committed them, with solemn injunctions of fidelity, to the custody of
Toby. For the remainder of that day we resolved to fast, as we had been
fortified by a breakfast in the morning; and now starting again to our
feet, we looked about us for a shelter during the night, which, from the
appearance of the heavens, promised to be a dark and tempestuous one.

There was no place near us which would in any way answer our purpose,
so turning our backs upon Nukuheva, we commenced exploring the unknown
regions which lay upon the other side of the mountain.

In this direction, as far as our vision extended, not a sign of life,
nor anything that denoted even the transient residence of man, could be
seen. The whole landscape seemed one unbroken solitude, the interior of
the island having apparently been untenanted since the morning of the
creation; and as we advanced through this wilderness, our voices
sounded strangely in our ears, as though human accents had never before
disturbed the fearful silence of the place, interrupted only by the low
murmurings of distant waterfalls.

Our disappointment, however, in not finding the various fruits with
which we had intended to regale ourselves during our stay in these
wilds, was a good deal lessened by the consideration that from this very
circumstance we should be much less exposed to a casual meeting with the
savage tribes about us, who we knew always dwelt beneath the shadows of
those trees which supplied them with food.

We wandered along, casting eager glances into every bush we passed,
until just as we had succeeded in mounting one of the many ridges that
intersected the ground, I saw in the grass before me something like an
indistinctly traced footpath, which appeared to lead along the top of
the ridge, and to descend--with it into a deep ravine about half a mile
in advance of us.

Robinson Crusoe could not have been more startled at the footprint in
the sand than we were at this unwelcome discovery. My first impulse was
to make as rapid a retreat as possible, and bend our steps in some
other direction; but our curiosity to see whither this path might lead,
prompted us to pursue it. So on we went, the track becoming more and
more visible the farther we proceeded, until it conducted us to the
verge of the ravine, where it abruptly terminated.

‘And so,’ said Toby, peering down into the chasm, ‘everyone that travels
this path takes a jump here, eh?’

‘Not so,’ said I, ‘for I think they might manage to descend without it;
what say you,--shall we attempt the feat?’

‘And what, in the name of caves and coal-holes, do you expect to find at
the bottom of that gulf but a broken neck--why it looks blacker than our
ship’s hold, and the roar of those waterfalls down there would batter
one’s brains to pieces.’

‘Oh, no, Toby,’ I exclaimed, laughing; ‘but there’s something to be seen
here, that’s plain, or there would have been no path, and I am resolved
to find out what it is.’

‘I will tell you what, my pleasant fellow,’ rejoined Toby quickly, ‘if
you are going to pry into everything you meet with here that excites
your curiosity, you will marvellously soon get knocked on the head; to
a dead certainty you will come bang upon a party of these savages in the
midst of your discovery-makings, and I doubt whether such an event would
particularly delight you, just take my advice for once, and let us ‘bout
ship and steer in some other direction; besides, it’s getting late and
we ought to be mooring ourselves for the night.’

‘That is just the thing I have been driving at,’ replied I; ‘and I am
thinking that this ravine will exactly answer our purpose, for it is
roomy, secluded, well watered, and may shelter us from the weather.’

‘Aye, and from sleep too, and by the same token will give us sore
throats, and rheumatisms into the bargain,’ cried Toby, with evident
dislike at the idea.

‘Oh, very well then, my lad,’ said I, ‘since you will not accompany me,
here I go alone. You will see me in the morning;’ and advancing to the
edge of the cliff upon which we had been standing, I proceeded to lower
myself down by the tangled roots which clustered about all the crevices
of the rock. As I had anticipated, Toby, in spite of his previous
remonstrances, followed my example, and dropping himself with the
activity of a squirrel from point to point, he quickly outstripped
me and effected a landing at the bottom before I had accomplished
two-thirds of the descent.

The sight that now greeted us was one that will ever be vividly
impressed upon my mind. Five foaming streams, rushing through as many
gorges, and swelled and turbid by the recent rains, united together in
one mad plunge of nearly eighty feet, and fell with wild uproar into a
deep black pool scooped out of the gloomy looking rocks that lay piled
around, and thence in one collected body dashed down a narrow sloping
channel which seemed to penetrate into the very bowels of the earth.
Overhead, vast roots of trees hung down from the sides of the ravine
dripping with moisture, and trembling with the concussions produced by
the fall. It was now sunset, and the feeble uncertain light that found
its way into these caverns and woody depths heightened their strange
appearance, and reminded us that in a short time we should find
ourselves in utter darkness.

As soon as I had satisfied my curiosity by gazing at this scene, I fell
to wondering how it was that what we had taken for a path should have
conducted us to so singular a place, and began to suspect that after all
I might have been deceived in supposing it to have been a trick
formed by the islanders. This was rather an agreeable reflection than
otherwise, for it diminished our dread of accidentally meeting with any
of them, and I came to the conclusion that perhaps we could not have
selected a more secure hiding-place than this very spot we had so
accidentally hit upon.

Toby agreed with me in this view of the matter, and we immediately began
gathering together the limbs of trees which lay scattered about, with
the view of constructing a temporary hut for the night. This we were
obliged to build close to the foot of the cataract, for the current of
water extended very nearly to the sides of the gorge. The few moments
of light that remained we employed in covering our hut with a species of
broad-bladed grass that grew in every fissure of the ravine. Our hut,
if it deserved to be called one, consisted of six or eight of the
straightest branches we could find laid obliquely against the steep wall
of rock, with their lower ends within a foot of the stream. Into the
space thus covered over we managed to crawl, and dispose our wearied
bodies as best we could.

Shall I ever forget that horrid night! As for poor Toby, I could
scarcely get a word out of him. It would have been some consolation to
have heard his voice, but he lay shivering the live-long night like a
man afflicted with the palsy, with his knees drawn up to his head, while
his back was supported against the dripping side of the rock. During
this wretched night there seemed nothing wanting to complete the perfect
misery of our condition. The rain descended in such torrents that our
poor shelter proved a mere mockery. In vain did I try to elude the
incessant streams that poured upon me; by protecting one part I only
exposed another, and the water was continually finding some new opening
through which to drench us.

I have had many a ducking in the course of my life, and in general
cared little about it; but the accumulated horrors of that night, the
deathlike coldness of the place, the appalling darkness and the dismal
sense of our forlorn condition, almost unmanned me.

It will not be doubted that the next morning we were early risers, and
as soon as I could catch the faintest glimpse of anything like daylight
I shook my companion by the arm, and told him it was sunrise. Poor Toby
lifted up his head, and after a moment’s pause said, in a husky voice,
‘Then, shipmate, my toplights have gone out, for it appears darker now
with my eyes open that it did when they were shut.’

‘Nonsense!’ exclaimed I; ‘You are not awake yet.’

‘Awake!’ roared Toby in a rage, ‘awake! You mean to insinuate I’ve been
asleep, do you? It is an insult to a man to suppose he could sleep in
such an infernal place as this.’

By the time I had apologized to my friend for having misconstrued his
silence, it had become somewhat more light, and we crawled out of our
lair. The rain had ceased, but everything around us was dripping with
moisture. We stripped off our saturated garments, and wrung them as dry
as we could. We contrived to make the blood circulate in our benumbed
limbs by rubbing them vigorously with our hands; and after performing
our ablutions in the stream, and putting on our still wet clothes,
we began to think it advisable to break our long fast, it being now
twenty-four hours since we had tasted food.

Accordingly our day’s ration was brought out, and seating ourselves on a
detached fragment of rock, we proceeded to discuss it. First we divided
it into two equal portions, and carefully rolling one of them up for our
evening’s repast, divided the remainder again as equally as possible,
and then drew lots for the first choice. I could have placed the morsel
that fell to my share upon the tip of my finger; but notwithstanding
this I took care that it should be full ten minutes before I had
swallowed the last crumb. What a true saying it is that ‘appetite
furnishes the best sauce.’ There was a flavour and a relish to this
small particle of food that under other circumstances it would have
been impossible for the most delicate viands to have imparted. A copious
draught of the pure water which flowed at our feet served to complete
the meal, and after it we rose sensibly refreshed, and prepared for
whatever might befall us.

We now carefully examined the chasm in which we had passed the night.
We crossed the stream, and gaining the further side of the pool I have
mentioned, discovered proofs that the spot must have been visited by
some one but a short time previous to our arrival. Further observation
convinced us that it had been regularly frequented, and, as we
afterwards conjectured from particular indications, for the purpose
of obtaining a certain root, from which the natives obtained a kind of
ointment.

These discoveries immediately determined us to abandon a place which
had presented no inducement for us to remain, except the promise of
security; and as we looked about us for the means of ascending again
into the upper regions, we at last found a practicable part of the rock,
and half an hour’s toil carried us to the summit of the same cliff from
which the preceding evening we had descended.

I now proposed to Toby that instead of rambling about the island,
exposing ourselves to discovery at every turn, we should select some
place as our fixed abode for as long a period as our food should
hold out, build ourselves a comfortable hut, and be as prudent and
circumspect as possible. To all this my companion assented, and we at
once set about carrying the plan into execution.

With this view, after exploring without success a little glen near us,
we crossed several of the ridges of which I have before spoken; and
about noon found ourselves ascending a long and gradually rising slope,
but still without having discovered any place adapted to our purpose.
Low and heavy clouds betokened an approaching storm, and we hurried on
to gain a covert in a clump of thick bushes, which appeared to terminate
the long ascent. We threw ourselves under the lee of these bushes, and
pulling up the long grass that grew around, covered ourselves completely
with it, and awaited the shower.

But it did not come as soon as we had expected, and before many minutes
my companion was fast asleep, and I was rapidly falling into the same
state of happy forgetfulness. Just at this juncture, however, down came
the rain with the violence that put all thoughts of slumber to flight.
Although in some measure sheltered, our clothes soon became as wet
as ever; this, after all the trouble we had taken to dry them, was
provoking enough: but there was no help for it; and I recommend all
adventurous youths who abandon vessels in romantic islands during the
rainy season to provide themselves with umbrellas.

After an hour or so the shower passed away. My companion slept through
it all, or at least appeared so to do; and now that it was over I had
not the heart to awaken him. As I lay on my back completely shrouded
with verdure, the leafy branches drooping over me, my limbs buried
in grass, I could not avoid comparing our situation with that of the
interesting babes in the wood. Poor little sufferers!--no wonder their
constitutions broke down under the hardships to which they were exposed.

During the hour or two spent under the shelter of these bushes, I began
to feel symptoms which I at once attributed to the exposure of the
preceding night. Cold shiverings and a burning fever succeeded one
another at intervals, while one of my legs was swelled to such a degree,
and pained me so acutely, that I half suspected I had been bitten by
some venomous reptile, the congenial inhabitant of the chasm from which
we had lately emerged. I may here remark by the way--what I subsequently
gleamed--that all the islands of Polynesia enjoy the reputation, in
common with the Hibernian isle, of being free from the presence of any
vipers; though whether Saint Patrick ever visited them, is a question I
shall not attempt to decide.

As the feverish sensation increased upon me I tossed about, still
unwilling to disturb my slumbering companion, from whose side I removed
two or three yards. I chanced to push aside a branch, and by so doing
suddenly disclosed to my view a scene which even now I can recall with
all the vividness of the first impression. Had a glimpse of the gardens
of Paradise been revealed to me, I could scarcely have been more
ravished with the sight.

From the spot where I lay transfixed with surprise and delight, I looked
straight down into the bosom of a valley, which swept away in long wavy
undulations to the blue waters in the distance. Midway towards the
sea, and peering here and there amidst the foliage, might be seen the
palmetto-thatched houses of its inhabitants glistening in the sun that
had bleached them to a dazzling whiteness. The vale was more than three
leagues in length, and about a mile across at its greatest width.

On either side it appeared hemmed in by steep and green acclivities,
which, uniting near the spot where I lay, formed an abrupt and
semicircular termination of grassy cliffs and precipices hundreds of
feet in height, over which flowed numberless small cascades. But the
crowning beauty of the prospect was its universal verdure; and in this
indeed consists, I believe, the peculiar charm of every Polynesian
landscape. Everywhere below me, from the base of the precipice upon
whose very verge I had been unconsciously reposing, the surface of the
vale presented a mass of foliage, spread with such rich profusion
that it was impossible to determine of what description of trees it
consisted.

But perhaps there was nothing about the scenery I beheld more impressive
than those silent cascades, whose slender threads of water, after
leaping down the steep cliffs, were lost amidst the rich herbage of the
valley.

Over all the landscape there reigned the most hushed repose, which I
almost feared to break, lest, like the enchanted gardens in the fairy
tale, a single syllable might dissolve the spell. For a long time,
forgetful alike of my own situation, and the vicinity of my still
slumbering companion, I remained gazing around me, hardly able to
comprehend by what means I had thus suddenly been made a spectator of
such a scene.




CHAPTER EIGHT

THE IMPORTANT QUESTION, TYPEE OR HAPPAR?--A WILD GOOSE CHASE--MY
SUFFERINGS--DISHEARTENING SITUATION--A NIGHT IN A RAVINE--MORNING
MEAL--HAPPY IDEA OF TOBY--JOURNEY TOWARDS THE VALLEY


Recovering from my astonishment at the beautiful scene before me, I
quickly awakened Toby, and informed him of the discovery I had made.
Together we now repaired to the border of the precipice, and my
companion’s admiration was equal to my own. A little reflection,
however, abated our surprise at coming so unexpectedly upon this valley,
since the large vales of Happar and Typee, lying upon this side of
Nukuheva, and extending a considerable distance from the sea towards the
interior, must necessarily terminate somewhere about this point.

The question now was as to which of those two places we were looking
down upon. Toby insisted that it was the abode of the Happar, and I that
it was tenanted by their enemies the ferocious Typees. To be sure I was
not entirely convinced by my own arguments, but Toby’s proposition to
descend at once into the valley, and partake of the hospitality of its
inmates, seemed to me to be risking so much upon the strength of a mere
supposition, that I resolved to oppose it until we had more evidence to
proceed upon.

The point was one of vital importance, as the natives of Happar were
not only at peace with Nukuheva, but cultivated with its inhabitants the
most friendly relations, and enjoyed besides a reputation for gentleness
and humanity which led us to expect from them, if not a cordial
reception, at least a shelter during the short period we should remain
in their territory.

On the other hand, the very name of Typee struck a panic into my heart
which I did not attempt to disguise. The thought of voluntarily throwing
ourselves into the hands of these cruel savages, seemed to me an act
of mere madness; and almost equally so the idea of venturing into the
valley, uncertain by which of these two tribes it was inhabited. That
the vale at our feet was tenanted by one of them, was a point that
appeared to us past all doubt, since we knew that they resided in this
quarter, although our information did not enlighten us further.

My companion, however, incapable of resisting the tempting prospect
which the place held out of an abundant supply of food and other means
of enjoyment, still clung to his own inconsiderate view of the subject,
nor could all my reasoning shake it. When I reminded him that it was
impossible for either of us to know anything with certainty, and when
I dwelt upon the horrible fate we should encounter were we rashly
to descend into the valley, and discover too late the error we had
committed, he replied by detailing all the evils of our present
condition, and the sufferings we must undergo should we continue to
remain where we then were.

Anxious to draw him away from the subject, if possible--for I saw
that it would be in vain to attempt changing his mind--I directed his
attention to a long bright unwooded tract of land which, sweeping down
from the elevations in the interior, descended into the valley before
us. I then suggested to him that beyond this ridge might lie a capacious
and untenanted valley, abounding with all manner of delicious fruits;
for I had heard that there were several such upon the island, and
proposed that we should endeavour to reach it, and if we found our
expectations realized we should at once take refuge in it and remain
there as long as we pleased.

He acquiesced in the suggestion; and we immediately, therefore, began
surveying the country lying before us, with a view of determining upon
the best route for us to pursue; but it presented little choice, the
whole interval being broken into steep ridges, divided by dark ravines,
extending in parallel lines at right angles to our direct course. All
these we would be obliged to cross before we could hope to arrive at our
destination.

A weary journey! But we decided to undertake it, though, for my own
part, I felt little prepared to encounter its fatigues, shivering and
burning by turns with the ague and fever; for I know not how else to
describe the alternate sensations I experienced, and suffering not
a little from the lameness which afflicted me. Added to this was the
faintness consequent on our meagre diet--a calamity in which Toby
participated to the same extent as myself.

These circumstances, however, only augmented my anxiety to reach a place
which promised us plenty and repose, before I should be reduced to a
state which would render me altogether unable to perform the journey.
Accordingly we now commenced it by descending the almost perpendicular
side of a steep and narrow gorge, bristling with a thick growth of
reeds. Here there was but one mode for us to adopt. We seated ourselves
upon the ground, and guided our descent by catching at the canes in our
path. This velocity with which we thus slid down the side of the ravine
soon brought us to a point where we could use our feet, and in a short
time we arrived at the edge of the torrent, which rolled impetuously
along the bed of the chasm.

After taking a refreshing draught from the water of the stream, we
addressed ourselves to a much more difficult undertaking than the last.
Every foot of our late descent had to be regained in ascending the
opposite side of the gorge--an operation rendered the less agreeable
from the consideration that in these perpendicular episodes we did not
progress a hundred yards on our journey. But, ungrateful as the task
was, we set about it with exemplary patience, and after a snail-like
progress of an hour or more, had scaled perhaps one half of the
distance, when the fever which had left me for a while returned with
such violence, and accompanied by so raging a thirst, that it required
all the entreaties of Toby to prevent me from losing all the fruits of
my late exertion, by precipitating myself madly down the cliffs we had
just climbed, in quest of the water which flowed so temptingly at their
base. At the moment all my hopes and fears appeared to be merged in
this one desire, careless of the consequences that might result from its
gratification. I am aware of no feeling, either of pleasure or of pain,
that so completely deprives one of an power to resist its impulses, as
this same raging thirst.

Toby earnestly conjured me to continue the ascent, assuring me that a
little more exertion would bring us to the summit, and that then in less
than five minutes we should find ourselves at the brink of the stream,
which must necessarily flow on the other side of the ridge.

‘Do not,’ he exclaimed, ‘turn back, now that we have proceeded thus far;
for I tell you that neither of us will have the courage to repeat the
attempt, if once more we find ourselves looking up to where we now are
from the bottom of these rocks!’

I was not yet so perfectly beside myself as to be heedless of these
representations, and therefore toiled on, ineffectually endeavouring to
appease the thirst which consumed me, by thinking that in a short time I
should be able to gratify it to my heart’s content.

At last we gained the top of the second elevation, the loftiest of
those I have described as extending in parallel lines between us and the
valley we desired to reach. It commanded a view of the whole intervening
distance; and, discouraged as I was by other circumstances, this
prospect plunged me into the very depths of despair. Nothing but dark
and fearful chasms, separated by sharp-crested and perpendicular ridges
as far as the eye could reach. Could we have stepped from summit
to summit of these steep but narrow elevations we could easily have
accomplished the distance; but we must penetrate to the bottom of every
yawning gulf, and scale in succession every one of the eminences before
us. Even Toby, although not suffering as I did, was not proof against
the disheartening influences of the sight.

But we did not long stand to contemplate it, impatient as I was to reach
the waters of the torrent which flowed beneath us. With an insensibility
to danger which I cannot call to mind without shuddering, we threw
ourselves down the depths of the ravine, startling its savage solitudes
with the echoes produced by the falling fragments of rock we every
moment dislodged from their places, careless of the insecurity of our
footing, and reckless whether the slight roots and twigs we clutched at
sustained us for the while, or treacherously yielded to our grasp. For
my own part, I scarcely knew whether I was helplessly falling from the
heights above, or whether the fearful rapidity with which I descended
was an act of my own volition.

In a few minutes we reached the foot of the gorge, and kneeling upon
a small ledge of dripping rocks, I bent over to the stream. What a
delicious sensation was I now to experience! I paused for a second to
concentrate all my capabilities of enjoyment, and then immerged my lips
in the clear element before me. Had the apples of Sodom turned to ashes
in my mouth, I could not have felt a more startling revulsion. A single
drop of the cold fluid seemed to freeze every drop of blood in my body;
the fever that had been burning in my veins gave place on the instant to
death-like chills, which shook me one after another like so many shocks
of electricity, while the perspiration produced by my late violent
exertions congealed in icy beads upon my forehead. My thirst was gone,
and I fairly loathed the water. Starting to my feet, the sight of those
dank rocks, oozing forth moisture at every crevice, and the dark
stream shooting along its dismal channel, sent fresh chills through
my shivering frame, and I felt as uncontrollable a desire to climb up
towards the genial sunlight as I before had to descend the ravine.

After two hours’ perilous exertions we stood upon the summit of another
ridge, and it was with difficulty I could bring myself to believe that
we had ever penetrated the black and yawning chasm which then gaped at
our feet. Again we gazed upon the prospect which the height commanded,
but it was just as depressing as the one which had before met our eyes.
I now felt that in our present situation it was in vain for us to think
of ever overcoming the obstacles in our way, and I gave up all thoughts
of reaching the vale which lay beyond this series of impediments; while
at the same time I could not devise any scheme to extricate ourselves
from the difficulties in which we were involved.

The remotest idea of returning to Nukuheva, unless assured of our
vessel’s departure, never once entered my mind, and indeed it was
questionable whether we could have succeeded in reaching it, divided as
we were from the bay by a distance we could not compute, and perplexed
too in our remembrance of localities by our recent wanderings. Besides,
it was unendurable the thought of retracing our steps and rendering all
our painful exertions of no avail.

There is scarcely anything when a man is in difficulties that he is
more disposed to look upon with abhorrence than a rightabout retrograde
movement--a systematic going over of the already trodden ground:
and especially if he has a love of adventure, such a course appears
indescribably repulsive, so long as there remains the least hope to be
derived from braving untried difficulties.

It was this feeling that prompted us to descend the opposite side of the
elevation we had just scaled, although with what definite object in view
it would have been impossible for either of us to tell.

Without exchanging a syllable upon the subject, Toby and myself
simultaneously renounced the design which had lured us thus
far--perceiving in each other’s countenances that desponding expression
which speaks more eloquently than words.

Together we stood towards the close of this weary day in the cavity of
the third gorge we had entered, wholly incapacitated for any further
exertion, until restored to some degree of strength by food and repose.

We seated ourselves upon the least uncomfortable spot we could select,
and Toby produced from the bosom of his frock the sacred package. In
silence we partook of the small morsel of refreshment that had been left
from the morning’s repast, and without once proposing to violate the
sanctity of our engagement with respect to the remainder, we rose to
our feet, and proceeded to construct some sort of shelter under which we
might obtain the sleep we so greatly needed.

Fortunately the spot was better adapted to our purpose than the one in
which we had passed the last wretched night. We cleared away the tall
reeds from the small but almost level bit of ground, and twisted them
into a low basket-like hut, which we covered with a profusion of long
thick leaves, gathered from a tree near at hand. We disposed them
thickly all around, reserving only a slight opening that barely
permitted us to crawl under the shelter we had thus obtained.

These deep recesses, though protected from the winds that assail the
summits of their lofty sides, are damp and chill to a degree that one
would hardly anticipate in such a climate; and being unprovided with
anything but our woollen frocks and thin duck trousers to resist the
cold of the place, we were the more solicitous to render our habitation
for the night as comfortable as we could. Accordingly, in addition to
what we had already done, we plucked down all the leaves within our
reach and threw them in a heap over our little hut, into which we now
crept, raking after us a reserved supply to form our couch.

That night nothing but the pain I suffered prevented me from sleeping
most refreshingly. As it was, I caught two or three naps, while Toby
slept away at my side as soundly as though he had been sandwiched
between two Holland sheets. Luckily it did not rain, and we were
preserved from the misery which a heavy shower would have occasioned
us. In the morning I was awakened by the sonorous voice of my companion
ringing in my ears and bidding me rise. I crawled out from our heap of
leaves, and was astonished at the change which a good night’s rest had
wrought in his appearance. He was as blithe and joyous as a young bird,
and was staying the keenness of his morning’s appetite by chewing the
soft bark of a delicate branch he held in his hand, and he recommended
the like to me as an admirable antidote against the gnawings of hunger.

For my own part, though feeling materially better than I had done the
preceding evening, I could not look at the limb that had pained me
so violently at intervals during the last twenty-four hours, without
experiencing a sense of alarm that I strove in vain to shake off.
Unwilling to disturb the flow of my comrade’s spirits, I managed to
stifle the complaints to which I might otherwise have given vent, and
calling upon him good-humouredly to speed our banquet, I prepared myself
for it by washing in the stream. This operation concluded, we swallowed,
or rather absorbed, by a peculiar kind of slow sucking process, our
respective morsels of nourishment, and then entered into a discussion as
to the steps is was necessary for us to pursue.

‘What’s to be done now?’ inquired I, rather dolefully.

‘Descend into that same valley we descried yesterday.’ rejoined Toby,
with a rapidity and loudness of utterance that almost led me to suspect
he had been slyly devouring the broadside of an ox in some of the
adjoining thickets. ‘What else,’ he continued, ‘remains for us to do but
that, to be sure? Why, we shall both starve to a certainty if we remain
here; and as to your fears of those Typees--depend upon it, it is all
nonsense.’

‘It is impossible that the inhabitants of such a lovely place as we
saw can be anything else but good fellows; and if you choose rather to
perish with hunger in one of these soppy caverns, I for one prefer to
chance a bold descent into the valley, and risk the consequences’.

‘And who is to pilot us thither,’ I asked, ‘even if we should decide
upon the measure you propose? Are we to go again up and down those
precipices that we crossed yesterday, until we reach the place we
started from, and then take a flying leap from the cliffs to the
valley?’

‘Faith, I didn’t think of that,’ said Toby; ‘sure enough, both sides of
the valley appeared to be hemmed in by precipices, didn’t they?’

‘Yes,’ answered I, ‘as steep as the sides of a line-of-battle ship,
and about a hundred times as high.’ My companion sank his head upon his
breast, and remained for a while in deep thought. Suddenly he sprang to
his feet, while his eyes lighted up with that gleam of intelligence that
marks the presence of some bright idea.

‘Yes, yes,’ he exclaimed; ‘the streams all run in the same direction,
and must necessarily flow into the valley before they reach the sea; all
we have to do is just to follow this stream, and sooner or later it will
lead us into the vale.’

‘You are right, Toby,’ I exclaimed, ‘you are right; it must conduct us
thither, and quickly too; for, see with what a steep inclination the
water descends.’

‘It does, indeed,’ burst forth my companion, overjoyed at my
verification of his theory, ‘it does indeed; why, it is as plain as a
pike-staff. Let us proceed at once; come, throw away all those stupid
ideas about the Typees, and hurrah for the lovely valley of the
Happars.’

‘You will have it to be Happar, I see, my dear fellow; pray Heaven you
may not find yourself deceived,’ observed I, with a shake of my head.

‘Amen to all that, and much more,’ shouted Toby, rushing forward; ‘but
Happar it is, for nothing else than Happar can it be. So glorious a
valley--such forests of bread-fruit trees--such groves of cocoanut--such
wilderness of guava-bushes! Ah! shipmate! don’t linger behind: in the
name of all delightful fruits, I am dying to be at them. Come on, come
on; shove ahead, there’s a lively lad; never mind the rocks; kick them
out of the way, as I do; and tomorrow, old fellow, take my word for
it, we shall be in clover. Come on;’ and so saying, he dashed along the
ravine like a madman, forgetting my inability to keep up with him. In a
few minutes, however, the exuberance of his spirits abated, and, pausing
for a while, he permitted me to overtake him.




CHAPTER NINE

PERILOUS PASSAGE OF THE RAVINE--DESCENT INTO THE VALLEY


The fearless confidence of Toby was contagious, and I began to adopt the
Happar side of the question. I could not, however, overcome a certain
feeling of trepidation as we made our way along these gloomy solitudes.
Our progress, at first comparatively easy, became more and more
difficult. The bed of the watercourse was covered with fragments of
broken rocks, which had fallen from above, offering so many obstructions
to the course of the rapid stream, which vexed and fretted about
them,--forming at intervals small waterfalls, pouring over into deep
basins, or splashing wildly upon heaps of stones.

From the narrowness of the gorge, and the steepness of its sides, there
was no mode of advancing but by wading through the water; stumbling
every moment over the impediments which lay hidden under its surface,
or tripping against the huge roots of trees. But the most annoying
hindrance we encountered was from a multitude of crooked boughs, which,
shooting out almost horizontally from the sides of the chasm, twisted
themselves together in fantastic masses almost to the surface of the
stream, affording us no passage except under the low arches which they
formed. Under these we were obliged to crawl on our hands and feet,
sliding along the oozy surface of the rocks, or slipping into the deep
pools, and with scarce light enough to guide us. Occasionally we would
strike our heads against some projecting limb of a tree; and while
imprudently engaged in rubbing the injured part, would fall sprawling
amongst flinty fragments, cutting and bruising ourselves, whilst the
unpitying waters flowed over our prostrate bodies. Belzoni, worming
himself through the subterranean passages of the Egyptian catacombs,
could not have met with great impediments than those we here
encountered. But we struggled against them manfully, well knowing our
only hope lay in advancing.

Towards sunset we halted at a spot where we made preparations for
passing the night. Here we constructed a hut, in much the same way as
before, and crawling into it, endeavoured to forget our sufferings. My
companion, I believe, slept pretty soundly; but at day break, when we
rolled out of our dwelling, I felt nearly disqualified for any further
efforts. Toby prescribed as a remedy for my illness the contents of one
of our little silk packages, to be taken at once in a single dose. To
this species of medical treatment, however, I would by no means accede,
much as he insisted upon it; and so we partook of our usual morsel, and
silently resumed our journey. It was now the fourth day since we left
Nukuheva, and the gnawings of hunger became painfully acute. We were
fain to pacify them by chewing the tender bark of roots and twigs,
which, if they did not afford us nourishment, were at least sweet and
pleasant to the taste.

Our progress along the steep watercourse was necessarily slow, and by
noon we had not advanced more than a mile. It was somewhere near this
part of the day that the noise of falling waters, which we had faintly
caught in the early morning, became more distinct; and it was not long
before we were arrested by a rocky precipice of nearly a hundred feet
in depth, that extended all across the channel, and over which the wild
stream poured in an unbroken leap. On each hand the walls of the
ravine presented their overhanging sides both above and below the fall,
affording no means whatever of avoiding the cataract by taking a circuit
round it.

‘What’s to be done now, Toby?’ said I.

‘Why,’ rejoined he, ‘as we cannot retreat, I suppose we must keep
shoving along.’

‘Very true, my dear Toby; but how do you purpose accomplishing that
desirable object?’

‘By jumping from the top of the fall, if there be no other way,’
unhesitatingly replied my companion: ‘it will be much the quickest way
of descent; but as you are not quite as active as I am, we will try some
other way.’

And, so saying, he crept cautiously along and peered over into the
abyss, while I remained wondering by what possible means we could
overcome this apparently insuperable obstruction. As soon as my
companion had completed his survey, I eagerly inquired the result.

‘The result of my observations you wish to know, do you?’ began Toby,
deliberately, with one of his odd looks: ‘well, my lad, the result of my
observations is very quickly imparted. It is at present uncertain which
of our two necks will have the honour to be broken first; but about a
hundred to one would be a fair bet in favour of the man who takes the
first jump.’

‘Then it is an impossible thing, is it?’ inquired I gloomily.

‘No, shipmate; on the contrary, it is the easiest thing in life: the
only awkward point is the sort of usage which our unhappy limbs may
receive when we arrive at the bottom, and what sort of travelling trim
we shall be in afterwards. But follow me now, and I will show you the
only chance we have.’ With this he conducted me to the verge of the
cataract, and pointed along the side of the ravine to a number of
curious looking roots, some three or four inches in thickness, and
several feet long, which, after twisting among the fissures of the rock,
shot perpendicularly from it and ran tapering to a point in the air,
hanging over the gulf like so many dark icicles. They covered nearly
the entire surface of one side of the gorge, the lowest of them
reaching even to the water. Many were moss grown and decayed, with their
extremities snapped short off, and those in the immediate vicinity of
the fall were slippery with moisture.

Toby’s scheme, and it was a desperate one, was to entrust ourselves
to these treacherous-looking roots, and by slipping down from one to
another to gain the bottom.

‘Are you ready to venture it?’ asked Toby, looking at me earnestly but
without saying a word as to the practicability of the plan.

‘I am,’ was my reply; for I saw it was our only resource if we wished to
advance, and as for retreating, all thoughts of that sort had been long
abandoned.

After I had signified my assent, Toby, without uttering a a single word,
crawled along the dripping ledge until he gained a point from whence
he could just reach one of the largest of the pendant roots; he shook
it--it quivered in his grasp, and when he let it go it twanged in the
air like a strong, wire sharply struck. Satisfied by his scrutiny, my
light limbed companion swung himself nimbly upon it, and twisting his
legs round it in sailor fashion, slipped down eight or ten feet, where
his weight gave it a motion not un-like that of a pendulum. He could not
venture to descend any further; so holding on with one hand, he with the
other shook one by one all the slender roots around him, and at last,
finding one which he thought trustworthy, shifted him self to it and
continued his downward progress.

So far so well; but I could not avoid comparing my heavier frame and
disabled condition with his light figure and remarkable activity;
but there was no help for it, and in less than a minute’s time I was
swinging directly over his head. As soon as his upturned eyes caught a
glimpse of me, he exclaimed in his usual dry tone, for the danger did
not seem to daunt him in the least, ‘Mate, do me the kindness not to
fall until I get out of your way;’ and then swinging himself more on
one side, he continued his descent. In the mean time I cautiously
transferred myself from the limb down which I had been slipping to a
couple of others that were near it, deeming two strings to my bow better
than one, and taking care to test their strength before I trusted my
weight to them.

On arriving towards the end of the second stage in this vertical
journey, and shaking the long roots which were round me, to my
consternation they snapped off one after another like so many pipe
stems, and fell in fragments against the side of the gulf, splashing at
last into the waters beneath.

As one after another the treacherous roots yielded to my grasp, and fell
into the torrent, my heart sunk within me. The branches on which I was
suspended over the yawning chasm swang to and fro in the air, and I
expected them every moment to snap in twain. Appalled at the dreadful
fate that menaced me, I clutched frantically at the only large root
which remained near me, but in vain; I could not reach it, though my
fingers were within a few inches of it. Again and again I tried to reach
it, until at length, maddened with the thought of my situation, I swayed
myself violently by striking my foot against the side of the rock, and
at the instant that I approached the large root caught desperately at
it, and transferred myself to it. It vibrated violently under the sudden
weight, but fortunately did not give way.

My brain grew dizzy with the idea of the frightful risk I had just run,
and I involuntarily closed my eyes to shut out the view of the
depth beneath me. For the instant I was safe, and I uttered a devout
ejaculation of thanksgiving for my escape.

‘Pretty well done,’ shouted Toby underneath me; ‘you are nimbler than
I thought you to be--hopping about up there from root to root like any
young squirrel. As soon as you have diverted yourself sufficiently, I
would advise you to proceed.’

‘Aye, aye, Toby, all in good time: two or three more such famous roots
as this, and I shall be with you.’

The residue of my downward progress was comparatively easy; the roots
were in greater abundance, and in one or two places jutting out points
of rock assisted me greatly. In a few moments I was standing by the side
of my companion.

Substituting a stout stick for the one I had thrown aside at the top of
the precipice, we now continued our course along the bed of the ravine.
Soon we were saluted by a sound in advance, that grew by degrees
louder and louder, as the noise of the cataract we were leaving behind
gradually died on our ears.

‘Another precipice for us, Toby.’

‘Very good; we can descend them, you know--come on.’

Nothing indeed appeared to depress or intimidate this intrepid fellow.
Typees or Niagaras, he was as ready to engage one as the other, and I
could not avoid a thousand times congratulating myself upon having such
a companion in an enterprise like the present.

After an hour’s painful progress, we reached the verge of another fall,
still loftier than the preceding and flanked both above and below with
the same steep masses of rock, presenting, however, here and there
narrow irregular ledges, supporting a shallow soil, on which grew a
variety of bushes and trees, whose bright verdure contrasted beautifully
with the foamy waters that flowed between them.

Toby, who invariably acted as pioneer, now proceeded to reconnoitre.
On his return, he reported that the shelves of rock on our right
would enable us to gain with little risk the bottom of the cataract.
Accordingly, leaving the bed of the stream at the very point where it
thundered down, we began crawling along one of those sloping ledges
until it carried us to within a few feet of another that inclined
downwards at a still sharper angle, and upon which, by assisting each
other we managed to alight in safety. We warily crept along this,
steadying ourselves by the naked roots of the shrubs that clung to every
fissure. As we proceeded, the narrow path became still more contracted,
rendering it difficult for us to maintain our footing, until suddenly,
as we reached an angle of the wall of rock where we had expected it to
widen, we perceived to our consternation that a yard or two further on
it abruptly terminated at a place we could not possibly hope to pass.

Toby as usual led the van, and in silence I waited to learn from him how
he proposed to extricate us from this new difficulty.

‘Well, my boy,’ I exclaimed, after the expiration of several minutes,
during which time my companion had not uttered a word, ‘what’s to be
done now?’

He replied in a tranquil tone, that probably the best thing we could do
in our present strait was to get out of it as soon as possible.

‘Yes, my dear Toby, but tell me how we are to get out of it.’

‘Something in this sort of style,’ he replied, and at the same moment to
my horror he slipped sideways off the rocks and, as I then thought, by
good fortune merely, alighted among the spreading branches of a species
of palm tree, that shooting its hardy roots along a ledge below, curved
its trunk upwards into the air, and presented a thick mass of foliage
about twenty feet below the spot where we had thus suddenly been brought
to a standstill. I involuntarily held my breath, expecting to see the
form of my companion, after being sustained for a moment by the branches
of the tree, sink through their frail support, and fall headlong to
the bottom. To my surprise and joy, however, he recovered himself, and
disentangling his limbs from the fractured branches, he peered out from
his leafy bed, and shouted lustily, ‘Come on, my hearty there is no
other alternative!’ and with this he ducked beneath the foliage, and
slipping down the trunk, stood in a moment at least fifty feet beneath
me, upon the broad shelf of rock from which sprung the tree he had
descended.

What would I not have given at that moment to have been by his side. The
feat he had just accomplished seemed little less than miraculous, and
I could hardly credit the evidence of my senses when I saw the wide
distance that a single daring act had so suddenly placed between us.

Toby’s animating ‘come on’ again sounded in my ears, and dreading to
lose all confidence in myself if I remained meditating upon the step,
I once more gazed down to assure myself of the relative bearing of the
tree and my own position, and then closing my eyes and uttering one
comprehensive ejaculation of prayer, I inclined myself over towards the
abyss, and after one breathless instant fell with a crash into the tree,
the branches snapping and cracking with my weight, as I sunk lower and
lower among them, until I was stopped by coming in contact with a sturdy
limb.

In a few moments I was standing at the foot of the tree manipulating
myself all over with a view of ascertaining the extent of the injuries
I had received. To my surprise the only effects of my feat were a few
slight contusions too trifling to care about. The rest of our descent
was easily accomplished, and in half an hour after regaining the ravine
we had partaken of our evening morsel, built our hut as usual, and
crawled under its shelter.

The next morning, in spite of our debility and the agony of hunger under
which we were now suffering, though neither of us confessed to the fact,
we struggled along our dismal and still difficult and dangerous path,
cheered by the hope of soon catching a glimpse of the valley before
us, and towards evening the voice of a cataract which had for some time
sounded like a low deep bass to the music of the smaller waterfalls,
broke upon our ears in still louder tones, and assured us that we were
approaching its vicinity.

That evening we stood on the brink of a precipice, over which the dark
stream bounded in one final leap of full 300 feet. The sheer descent
terminated in the region we so long had sought. On each side of the
fall, two lofty and perpendicular bluffs buttressed the sides of the
enormous cliff, and projected into the sea of verdure with which the
valley waved, and a range of similar projecting eminences stood disposed
in a half circle about the head if the vale. A thick canopy of trees
hung over the very verge of the fall, leaving an arched aperture for the
passage of the waters, which imparted a strange picturesqueness to the
scene.

The valley was now before us; but instead of being conducted into its
smiling bosom by the gradual descent of the deep watercourse we had thus
far pursued, all our labours now appeared to have been rendered futile
by its abrupt termination. But, bitterly disappointed, we did not
entirely despair.

As it was now near sunset we determined to pass the night where we were,
and on the morrow, refreshed by sleep, and by eating at one meal all our
stock of food, to accomplish a descent into the valley, or perish in the
attempt.

We laid ourselves down that night on a spot, the recollection of which
still makes me shudder. A small table of rock which projected over the
precipice on one side of the stream, and was drenched by the spray
of the fall, sustained a huge trunk of a tree which must have been
deposited there by some heavy freshet. It lay obliquely, with one end
resting on the rock and the other supported by the side of the ravine.
Against it we placed in a sloping direction a number of the half decayed
boughs that were strewn about, and covering the whole with twigs and
leaves, awaited the morning’s light beneath such shelter as it afforded.

During the whole of this night the continual roaring of the
cataract--the dismal moaning of the gale through the trees--the
pattering of the rain, and the profound darkness, affected my spirits to
a degree which nothing had ever before produced. Wet, half famished,
and chilled to the heart with the dampness of the place, and nearly wild
with the pain I endured, I fairly cowered down to the earth under
this multiplication of hardships, and abandoned myself to frightful
anticipations of evil; and my companion, whose spirit at last was a good
deal broken, scarcely uttered a word during the whole night.

At length the day dawned upon us, and rising from our miserable pallet,
we stretched our stiffened joints, and after eating all that remained
of our bread, prepared for the last stage of our journey. I will not
recount every hair-breadth escape, and every fearful difficulty that
occurred before we succeeded in reaching the bosom of the valley. As I
have already described similar scenes, it will be sufficient to say that
at length, after great toil and great dangers, we both stood with no
limbs broken at the head of that magnificent vale which five days before
had so suddenly burst upon my sight, and almost beneath the shadow of
those very cliffs from whose summits we had gazed upon the prospect.




CHAPTER TEN

THE HEAD OF THE VALLEY--CAUTIOUS ADVANCE--A PATH--FRUIT--DISCOVERY
OF TWO OF THE NATIVES--THEIR SINGULAR CONDUCT--APPROACH TOWARDS
THE INHABITED PARTS OF THE VALE--SENSATION PRODUCED BY OUR
APPEARANCE--RECEPTION AT THE HOUSE OF ONE OF THE NATIVES


How to obtain the fruit which we felt convinced must grow near at hand
was our first thought.

Typee or Happar? A frightful death at the hands of the fiercest of
cannibals, or a kindly reception from a gentler race of savages? Which?
But it was too late now to discuss a question which would so soon be
answered.

The part of the valley in which we found ourselves appeared to be
altogether uninhabited. An almost impenetrable thicket extended
from side to side, without presenting a single plant affording the
nourishment we had confidently calculated upon; and with this object, we
followed the course of the stream, casting quick glances as we
proceeded into the thick jungles on each hand. My companion--to whose
solicitations I had yielded in descending into the valley--now that
the step was taken, began to manifest a degree of caution I had little
expected from him. He proposed that in the event of our finding an
adequate supply of fruit, we should remain in this unfrequented portion
of the country--where we should run little chance of being surprised by
its occupants, whoever they might be--until sufficiently recruited to
resume our journey; when laying a store of food equal to our wants, we
might easily regain the bay of Nukuheva, after the lapse of a sufficient
interval to ensure the departure of our vessel.

I objected strongly to this proposition, plausible as it was, as the
difficulties of the route would be almost insurmountable, unacquainted
as we were with the general bearings of the country, and I reminded
my companion of the hardships which we had already encountered in our
uncertain wanderings; in a word, I said that since we had deemed
it advisable to enter the valley, we ought manfully to face the
consequences, whatever they might be; the more especially as I was
convinced there was no alternative left us but to fall in with the
natives at once, and boldly risk the reception they might give us; and
that as to myself, I felt the necessity of rest and shelter, and that
until I had obtained them, I should be wholly unable to encounter such
sufferings as we had lately passed through. To the justice of these
observations Toby somewhat reluctantly assented.

We were surprised that, after moving as far as we had along the valley,
we should still meet with the same impervious thickets; and thinking,
that although the borders of the stream might be lined for some distance
with them, yet beyond there might be more open ground, I requested Toby
to keep a bright look-out upon one side, while I did the same on the
other, in order to discover some opening in the bushes, and especially
to watch for the slightest appearance of a path or anything else that
might indicate the vicinity of the islanders.

What furtive and anxious glances we cast into those dim-looking shadows!
With what apprehensions we proceeded, ignorant at what moment we might
be greeted by the javelin of some ambushed savage. At last my companion
paused, and directed my attention to a narrow opening in the foliage. We
struck into it, and it soon brought us by an indistinctly traced path to
a comparatively clear space, at the further end of which we descried
a number of the trees, the native name of which is ‘annuee’, and which
bear a most delicious fruit. What a race! I hobbling over the ground
like some decrepid wretch, and Toby leaping forward like a greyhound. He
quickly cleared one of the trees on which there were two or three of
the fruit, but to our chagrin they proved to be much decayed; the rinds
partly opened by the birds, and their hearts half devoured. However, we
quickly despatched them, and no ambrosia could have been more delicious.

We looked about us uncertain whither to direct our steps, since the path
we had so far followed appeared to be lost in the open space around us.
At last we resolved to enter a grove near at hand, and had advanced a
few rods, when, just upon its skirts, I picked up a slender bread-fruit
shoot perfectly green, and with the tender bark freshly stripped from
it. It was still slippery with moisture, and appeared as if it had been
but that moment thrown aside. I said nothing, but merely held it up to
Toby, who started at this undeniable evidence of the vicinity of the
savages.

The plot was now thickening.--A short distance further lay a little
faggot of the same shoots bound together with a strip of bark. Could it
have been thrown down by some solitary native, who, alarmed at seeing
us, had hurried forward to carry the tidings of our approach to his
countrymen?--Typee or Happar?--But it was too late to recede, so we
moved on slowly, my companion in advance casting eager glances under the
trees on each side, until all at once I saw him recoil as if stung by
an adder. Sinking on his knee, he waved me off with one hand, while with
the other he held aside some intervening leaves, and gazed intently at
some object.

Disregarding his injunction, I quickly approached him and caught a
glimpse of two figures partly hidden by the dense foliage; they were
standing close together, and were perfectly motionless. They must have
previously perceived us, and withdrawn into the depths of the wood to
elude our observation.

My mind was at once made up. Dropping my staff, and tearing open the
package of things we had brought from the ship, I unrolled the cotton
cloth, and holding it in one hand picked with the other a twig from the
bushes beside me, and telling Toby to follow my example, I broke through
the covert and advanced, waving the branch in token of peace towards
the shrinking forms before me. They were a boy and a girl, slender and
graceful, and completely naked, with the exception of a slight girdle of
bark, from which depended at opposite points two of the russet leaves of
the bread-fruit tree. An arm of the boy, half screened from sight by
her wild tresses, was thrown about the neck of the girl, while with the
other he held one of her hands in his; and thus they stood together,
their heads inclined forward, catching the faint noise we made in our
progress, and with one foot in advance, as if half inclined to fly from
our presence.

As we drew near, their alarm evidently increased. Apprehensive that
they might fly from us altogether, I stopped short and motioned them
to advance and receive the gift I extended towards them, but they would
not; I then uttered a few words of their language with which I was
acquainted, scarcely expected that they would understand me, but to show
that we had not dropped from the clouds upon them. This appeared to give
them a little confidence, so I approached nearer, presenting the cloth
with one hand, and holding the bough with the other, while they slowly
retreated. At last they suffered us to approach so near to them that we
were enabled to throw the cotton cloth across their shoulders, giving
them to understand that it was theirs, and by a variety of gestures
endeavouring to make them understand that we entertained the highest
possible regard for them.

The frightened pair now stood still, whilst we endeavoured to make them
comprehend the nature of our wants. In doing this Toby went through with
a complete series of pantomimic illustrations--opening his mouth from
ear to ear, and thrusting his fingers down his throat, gnashing his
teeth and rolling his eyes about, till I verily believe the poor
creatures took us for a couple of white cannibals who were about to
make a meal of them. When, however, they understood us, they showed
no inclination to relieve our wants. At this juncture it began to rain
violently, and we motioned them to lead us to some place of shelter.
With this request they appeared willing to comply, but nothing could
evince more strongly the apprehension with which they regarded us,
than the way in which, whilst walking before us, they kept their eyes
constantly turned back to watch every movement we made, and even our
very looks.

‘Typee or Happar, Toby?’ asked I as we walked after them.

‘Of course Happar,’ he replied, with a show of confidence which was
intended to disguise his doubts.

‘We shall soon know,’ I exclaimed; and at the same moment I
stepped forward towards our guides, and pronouncing the two names
interrogatively and pointing to the lowest part of the valley,
endeavoured to come to the point at once. They repeated the words after
me again and again, but without giving any peculiar emphasis to either,
so that I was completely at a loss to understand them; for a couple of
wilier young things than we afterwards found them to have been on this
particular occasion never probably fell in any traveller’s way.

More and more curious to ascertain our fate, I now threw together in the
form of a question the words ‘Happar’ and ‘Motarkee’, the latter being
equivalent to the word ‘good’. The two natives interchanged glances
of peculiar meaning with one another at this, and manifested no little
surprise; but on the repetition of the question after some consultation
together, to the great joy of Toby, they answered in the affirmative.
Toby was now in ecstasies, especially as the young savages continued
to reiterate their answer with great energy, as though desirous of
impressing us with the idea that being among the Happars, we ought to
consider ourselves perfectly secure.

Although I had some lingering doubts, I feigned great delight with Toby
at this announcement, while my companion broke out into a pantomimic
abhorrence of Typee, and immeasurable love for the particular valley in
which we were; our guides all the while gazing uneasily at one another
as if at a loss to account for our conduct.

They hurried on, and we followed them; until suddenly they set up a
strange halloo, which was answered from beyond the grove through which
we were passing, and the next moment we entered upon some open ground,
at the extremity of which we descried a long, low hut, and in front of
it were several young girls. As soon as they perceived us they fled with
wild screams into the adjoining thickets, like so many startled fawns.
A few moments after the whole valley resounded with savage outcries, and
the natives came running towards us from every direction.

Had an army of invaders made an irruption into their territory they
could not have evinced greater excitement. We were soon completely
encircled by a dense throng, and in their eager desire to behold us they
almost arrested our progress; an equal number surrounded our youthful
guides, who with amazing volubility appeared to be detailing the
circumstances which had attended their meeting with us. Every item of
intelligence appeared to redouble the astonishment of the islanders, and
they gazed at us with inquiring looks.

At last we reached a large and handsome building of bamboos, and were by
signs told to enter it, the natives opening a lane for us through which
to pass; on entering without ceremony, we threw our exhausted frames
upon the mats that covered the floor. In a moment the slight tenement
was completely full of people, whilst those who were unable to obtain
admittance gazed at us through its open cane-work.

It was now evening, and by the dim light we could just discern the
savage countenances around us, gleaming with wild curiosity and wonder;
the naked forms and tattooed limbs of brawny warriors, with here and
there the slighter figures of young girls, all engaged in a perfect
storm of conversation, of which we were of course the one only
theme, whilst our recent guides were fully occupied in answering the
innumerable questions which every one put to them. Nothing can exceed
the fierce gesticulation of these people when animated in conversation,
and on this occasion they gave loose to all their natural vivacity,
shouting and dancing about in a manner that well nigh intimidated us.

Close to where we lay, squatting upon their haunches, were some eight or
ten noble-looking chiefs--for such they subsequently proved to be--who,
more reserved than the rest, regarded us with a fixed and stern
attention, which not a little discomposed our equanimity. One of them
in particular, who appeared to be the highest in rank, placed himself
directly facing me, looking at me with a rigidity of aspect under which
I absolutely quailed. He never once opened his lips, but maintained his
severe expression of countenance, without turning his face aside for
a single moment. Never before had I been subjected to so strange and
steady a glance; it revealed nothing of the mind of the savage, but it
appeared to be reading my own.

After undergoing this scrutiny till I grew absolutely nervous, with a
view of diverting it if possible, and conciliating the good opinion of
the warrior, I took some tobacco from the bosom of my frock and
offered it to him. He quietly rejected the proffered gift, and, without
speaking, motioned me to return it to its place.

In my previous intercourse with the natives of Nukuheva and Tior, I had
found that the present of a small piece of tobacco would have rendered
any of them devoted to my service. Was this act of the chief a token of
his enmity? Typee or Happar? I asked within myself. I started, for at
the same moment this identical question was asked by the strange being
before me. I turned to Toby, the flickering light of a native taper
showed me his countenance pale with trepidation at this fatal question.
I paused for a second, and I know not by what impulse it was that I
answered ‘Typee’. The piece of dusky statuary nodded in approval, and
then murmured ‘Motarkee!’ ‘Motarkee,’ said I, without further hesitation
‘Typee motarkee.’

What a transition! The dark figures around us leaped to their feet,
clapped their hands in transport, and shouted again and again the
talismanic syllables, the utterance of which appeared to have settled
everything.

When this commotion had a little subsided, the principal chief squatted
once more before me, and throwing himself into a sudden rage, poured
forth a string of philippics, which I was at no loss to understand, from
the frequent recurrence of the word Happar, as being directed against
the natives of the adjoining valley. In all these denunciations my
companion and I acquiesced, while we extolled the character of the
warlike Typees. To be sure our panegyrics were somewhat laconic,
consisting in the repetition of that name, united with the potent
adjective ‘motarkee’. But this was sufficient, and served to conciliate
the good will of the natives, with whom our congeniality of sentiment on
this point did more towards inspiring a friendly feeling than anything
else that could have happened.

At last the wrath of the chief evaporated, and in a few moments he
was as placid as ever. Laying his hand upon his breast, he gave me to
understand that his name was ‘Mehevi’, and that, in return, he wished me
to communicate my appellation. I hesitated for an instant, thinking that
it might be difficult for him to pronounce my real name, and then with
the most praiseworthy intentions intimated that I was known as ‘Tom’.
But I could not have made a worse selection; the chief could not master
it. ‘Tommo,’ ‘Tomma’, ‘Tommee’, everything but plain ‘Tom’. As he
persisted in garnishing the word with an additional syllable, I
compromised the matter with him at the word ‘Tommo’; and by that name
I went during the entire period of my stay in the valley. The same
proceeding was gone through with Toby, whose mellifluous appellation was
more easily caught.

An exchange of names is equivalent to a ratification of good will and
amity among these simple people; and as we were aware of this fact, we
were delighted that it had taken place on the present occasion.

Reclining upon our mats, we now held a kind of levee, giving audience
to successive troops of the natives, who introduced themselves to us by
pronouncing their respective names, and retired in high good humour on
receiving ours in return. During this ceremony the greatest merriment
prevailed nearly every announcement on the part of the islanders being
followed by a fresh sally of gaiety, which induced me to believe that
some of them at least were innocently diverting the company at our
expense, by bestowing upon themselves a string of absurd titles, of the
humour of which we were of course entirely ignorant.

All this occupied about an hour, when the throng having a little
diminished, I turned to Mehevi and gave him to understand that we were
in need of food and sleep. Immediately the attentive chief addressed a
few words to one of the crowd, who disappeared, and returned in a few
moments with a calabash of ‘poee-poee’, and two or three young cocoanuts
stripped of their husks, and with their shells partly broken. We both
of us forthwith placed one of these natural goblets to our lips, and
drained it in a moment of the refreshing draught it contained. The
poee-poee was then placed before us, and even famished as I was, I
paused to consider in what manner to convey it to my mouth.

This staple article of food among the Marquese islanders is manufactured
from the produce of the bread-fruit tree. It somewhat resembles in
its plastic nature our bookbinders’ paste, is of a yellow colour, and
somewhat tart to the taste.

Such was the dish, the merits of which I was now eager to discuss. I
eyed it wistfully for a moment, and then, unable any longer to stand on
ceremony, plunged my hand into the yielding mass, and to the boisterous
mirth of the natives drew it forth laden with the poee-poee, which
adhered in lengthy strings to every finger. So stubborn was its
consistency, that in conveying my heavily-weighted hand to my mouth, the
connecting links almost raised the calabash from the mats on which it
had been placed. This display of awkwardness--in which, by-the-bye, Toby
kept me company--convulsed the bystanders with uncontrollable laughter.

As soon as their merriment had somewhat subsided, Mehevi, motioning us
to be attentive, dipped the forefinger of his right hand in the dish,
and giving it a rapid and scientific twirl, drew it out coated smoothly
with the preparation. With a second peculiar flourish he prevented the
poee-poee from dropping to the ground as he raised it to his mouth, into
which the finger was inserted and drawn forth perfectly free from any
adhesive matter.

This performance was evidently intended for our instruction; so I
again essayed the feat on the principles inculcated, but with very ill
success.

A starving man, however, little heeds conventional proprieties,
especially on a South-Sea Island, and accordingly Toby and I partook of
the dish after our own clumsy fashion, beplastering our faces all over
with the glutinous compound, and daubing our hands nearly to the
wrist. This kind of food is by no means disagreeable to the palate of a
European, though at first the mode of eating it may be. For my own
part, after the lapse of a few days I became accustomed to its singular
flavour, and grew remarkably fond of it.

So much for the first course; several other dishes followed it, some of
which were positively delicious. We concluded our banquet by tossing
off the contents of two more young cocoanuts, after which we regaled
ourselves with the soothing fumes of tobacco, inhaled from a quaintly
carved pipe which passed round the circle.

During the repast, the natives eyed us with intense curiosity, observing
our minutest motions, and appearing to discover abundant matter for
comment in the most trifling occurrence. Their surprise mounted the
highest, when we began to remove our uncomfortable garments, which were
saturated with rain. They scanned the whiteness of our limbs, and seemed
utterly unable to account for the contrast they presented to the swarthy
hue of our faces embrowned from a six months’ exposure to the scorching
sun of the Line. They felt our skin, much in the same way that a silk
mercer would handle a remarkably fine piece of satin; and some of them
went so far in their investigation as to apply the olfactory organ.

Their singular behaviour almost led me to imagine that they never before
had beheld a white man; but a few moments’ reflection convinced me that
this could not have been the case; and a more satisfactory reason for
their conduct has since suggested itself to my mind.

Deterred by the frightful stories related of its inhabitants, ships
never enter this bay, while their hostile relations with the tribes in
the adjoining valleys prevent the Typees from visiting that section of
the island where vessels occasionally lie. At long intervals, however,
some intrepid captain will touch on the skirts of the bay, with two or
three armed boats’ crews and accompanied by interpreters. The natives
who live near the sea descry the strangers long before they reach their
waters, and aware of the purpose for which they come, proclaim loudly
the news of their approach. By a species of vocal telegraph the
intelligence reaches the inmost recesses of the vale in an inconceivably
short space of time, drawing nearly its whole population down to
the beach laden with every variety of fruit. The interpreter, who is
invariably a ‘tabooed Kanaka’ *, leaps ashore with the goods intended for
barter, while the boats, with their oars shipped, and every man on his
thwart, lie just outside the surf, heading off the shore, in readiness
at the first untoward event to escape to the open sea. As soon as the
traffic is concluded, one of the boats pulls in under cover of the
muskets of the others, the fruit is quickly thrown into her, and the
transient visitors precipitately retire from what they justly consider
so dangerous a vicinity.

* The word ‘Kanaka’ is at the present day universally used in the South
Seas by Europeans to designate the Islanders. In the various dialects
of the principal groups it is simply a sexual designation applied to
the males; but it is now used by the natives in their intercourse with
foreigners in the same sense in which the latter employ it.

A ‘Tabooed Kanaka’ is an islander whose person has been made to a
certain extent sacred by the operation of a singular custom hereafter to
be explained.


The intercourse occurring with Europeans being so restricted, no wonder
that the inhabitants of the valley manifested so much curiosity with
regard to us, appearing as we did among them under such singular
circumstances. I have no doubt that we were the first white men who ever
penetrated thus far back into their territories, or at least the first
who had ever descended from the head of the vale. What had brought us
thither must have appeared a complete mystery to them, and from our
ignorance of the language it was impossible for us to enlighten them. In
answer to inquiries which the eloquence of their gestures enabled us to
comprehend, all that we could reply was, that we had come from Nukuheva,
a place, be it remembered, with which they were at open war. This
intelligence appeared to affect them with the most lively emotions.
‘Nukuheva motarkee?’ they asked. Of course we replied most energetically
in the negative.

Then they plied us with a thousand questions, of which we could
understand nothing more than that they had reference to the recent
movements of the French, against whom they seemed to cherish the most
fierce hatred. So eager were they to obtain information on this point,
that they still continued to propound their queries long after we had
shown that we were utterly unable to answer them. Occasionally we caught
some indistinct idea of their meaning, when we would endeavour by every
method in our power to communicate the desired intelligence. At such
times their gratification was boundless, and they would redouble their
efforts to make us comprehend them more perfectly. But all in vain; and
in the end they looked at us despairingly, as if we were the receptacles
of invaluable information; but how to come at it they knew not.

After a while the group around us gradually dispersed, and we were
left about midnight (as we conjectured) with those who appeared to be
permanent residents of the house. These individuals now provided us with
fresh mats to lie upon, covered us with several folds of tappa, and then
extinguishing the tapers that had been burning, threw themselves down
beside us, and after a little desultory conversation were soon sound
asleep.




CHAPTER ELEVEN

MIDNIGHT REFLECTIONS--MORNING VISITORS--A WARRIOR IN COSTUME--A SAVAGE
AESCULAPIUS--PRACTICE OF THE HEALING ART--BODY SERVANT--A DWELLING-HOUSE
OF THE VALLEY DESCRIBED--PORTRAITS OF ITS INMATES


Various and conflicting were the thoughts which oppressed me during the
silent hours that followed the events related in the preceding chapter.
Toby, wearied with the fatigues of the day, slumbered heavily by my
side; but the pain under which I was suffering effectually prevented
my sleeping, and I remained distressingly alive to all the fearful
circumstances of our present situation. Was it possible that, after all
our vicissitudes, we were really in the terrible valley of Typee, and
at the mercy of its inmates, a fierce and unrelenting tribe of savages?
Typee or Happar? I shuddered when I reflected that there was no longer
any room for doubt; and that, beyond all hope of escape, we were now
placed in those very circumstances from the bare thought of which I had
recoiled with such abhorrence but a few days before. What might not
be our fearful destiny? To be sure, as yet we had been treated with no
violence; nay, had been even kindly and hospitably entertained. But what
dependence could be placed upon the fickle passions which sway the bosom
of a savage? His inconstancy and treachery are proverbial. Might it
not be that beneath these fair appearances the islanders covered some
perfidious design, and that their friendly reception of us might only
precede some horrible catastrophe? How strongly did these forebodings
spring up in my mind as I lay restlessly upon a couch of mats surrounded
by the dimly revealed forms of those whom I so greatly dreaded!

From the excitement of these fearful thoughts I sank towards morning
into an uneasy slumber; and on awaking, with a start, in the midst of an
appalling dream, looked up into the eager countenance of a number of the
natives, who were bending over me.

It was broad day; and the house was nearly filled with young females,
fancifully decorated with flowers, who gazed upon me as I rose with
faces in which childish delight and curiosity were vividly portrayed.
After waking Toby, they seated themselves round us on the mats, and gave
full play to that prying inquisitiveness which time out of mind has been
attributed to the adorable sex.

As these unsophisticated young creatures were attended by no jealous
duennas, their proceedings were altogether informal, and void of
artificial restraint. Long and minute was the investigation with which
they honoured us, and so uproarious their mirth, that I felt infinitely
sheepish; and Toby was immeasurably outraged at their familiarity.

These lively young ladies were at the same time wonderfully polite
and humane; fanning aside the insects that occasionally lighted on our
brows; presenting us with food; and compassionately regarding me in the
midst of my afflictions. But in spite of all their blandishments, my
feelings of propriety were exceedingly shocked, for I could but consider
them as having overstepped the due limits of female decorum.

Having diverted themselves to their hearts’ content, our young visitants
now withdrew, and gave place to successive troops of the other sex, who
continued flocking towards the house until near noon; by which time I
have no doubt that the greater part of the inhabitants of the valley had
bathed themselves in the light of our benignant countenances.

At last, when their numbers began to diminish, a superb-looking warrior
stooped the towering plumes of his head-dress beneath the low portal,
and entered the house. I saw at once that he was some distinguished
personage, the natives regarding him with the utmost deference, and
making room for him as he approached. His aspect was imposing. The
splendid long drooping tail-feathers of the tropical bird, thickly
interspersed with the gaudy plumage of the cock, were disposed in an
immense upright semicircle upon his head, their lower extremities being
fixed in a crescent of guinea-heads which spanned the forehead. Around
his neck were several enormous necklaces of boar’s tusks, polished like
ivory, and disposed in such a manner as that the longest and largest
were upon his capacious chest. Thrust forward through the large
apertures in his ears were two small and finely-shaped sperm whale
teeth, presenting their cavities in front, stuffed with freshly-plucked
leaves, and curiously wrought at the other end into strange little
images and devices. These barbaric trinkets, garnished in this manner at
their open extremities, and tapering and curving round to a point behind
the ear, resembled not a little a pair of cornucopias.

The loins of the warrior were girt about with heavy folds of a
dark-coloured tappa, hanging before and behind in clusters of braided
tassels, while anklets and bracelets of curling human hair completed
his unique costume. In his right hand he grasped a beautifully carved
paddle-spear, nearly fifteen feet in length, made of the bright
koar-wood, one end sharply pointed, and the other flattened like an
oar-blade. Hanging obliquely from his girdle by a loop of sinnate was
a richly decorated pipe; the slender reed forming its stem was coloured
with a red pigment, and round it, as well as the idol-bowl, fluttered
little streamers of the thinnest tappa.

But that which was most remarkable in the appearance of this splendid
islander was the elaborate tattooing displayed on every noble limb. All
imaginable lines and curves and figures were delineated over his whole
body, and in their grotesque variety and infinite profusion I could only
compare them to the crowded groupings of quaint patterns we sometimes
see in costly pieces of lacework. The most simple and remarkable of all
these ornaments was that which decorated the countenance of the chief.
Two broad stripes of tattooing, diverging from the centre of his shaven
crown, obliquely crossed both eyes--staining the lids--to a little
below each ear, where they united with another stripe which swept in a
straight line along the lips and formed the base of the triangle.
The warrior, from the excellence of his physical proportions, might
certainly have been regarded as one of Nature’s noblemen, and the lines
drawn upon his face may possibly have denoted his exalted rank.

This warlike personage, upon entering the house, seated himself at some
distance from the spot where Toby and myself reposed, while the rest of
the savages looked alternately from us to him, as if in expectation of
something they were disappointed in not perceiving. Regarding the chief
attentively, I thought his lineaments appeared familiar to me. As
soon as his full face was turned upon me, and I again beheld its
extraordinary embellishment, and met the strange gaze to which I had
been subjected the preceding night, I immediately, in spite of the
alteration in his appearance, recognized the noble Mehevi. On addressing
him, he advanced at once in the most cordial manner, and greeting me
warmly, seemed to enjoy not a little the effect his barbaric costume had
produced upon me.

I forthwith determined to secure, if possible, the good-will of this
individual, as I easily perceived he was a man of great authority in his
tribe, and one who might exert a powerful influence upon our subsequent
fate. In the endeavour I was not repulsed; for nothing could surpass
the friendliness he manifested towards both my companion and myself.
He extended his sturdy limbs by our side, and endeavoured to make
us comprehend the full extent of the kindly feelings by which he was
actuated. The almost insuperable difficulty in communicating to one
another our ideas affected the chief with no little mortification. He
evinced a great desire to be enlightened with regard to the customs and
peculiarities of the far-off country we had left behind us, and to which
under the name of Maneeka he frequently alluded.

But that which more than any other subject engaged his attention was
the late proceedings of the ‘Frannee’ as he called the French, in the
neighbouring bay of Nukuheva. This seemed a never-ending theme with him,
and one concerning which he was never weary of interrogating us. All the
information we succeeded in imparting to him on this subject was little
more than that we had seen six men-of-war lying in the hostile bay at
the time we had left it. When he received this intelligence, Mehevi, by
the aid of his fingers, went through a long numerical calculation, as if
estimating the number of Frenchmen the squadron might contain.

It was just after employing his faculties in this way that he happened
to notice the swelling in my limb. He immediately examined it with the
utmost attention, and after doing so, despatched a boy who happened to
be standing by with some message.

After the lapse of a few moments the stripling re-entered the house with
an aged islander, who might have been taken for old Hippocrates himself.
His head was as bald as the polished surface of a cocoanut shell, which
article it precisely resembled in smoothness and colour, while a long
silvery beard swept almost to his girdle of bark. Encircling his temples
was a bandeau of the twisted leaves of the Omoo tree, pressed closely
over the brows to shield his feeble vision from the glare of the sun.
His tottering steps were supported by a long slim staff, resembling the
wand with which a theatrical magician appears on the stage, and in
one hand he carried a freshly plaited fan of the green leaflets of the
cocoanut tree. A flowing robe of tappa, knotted over the shoulder, hung
loosely round his stooping form, and heightened the venerableness of his
aspect.

Mehevi, saluting this old gentleman, motioned him to a seat between us,
and then uncovering my limb, desired him to examine it. The leech
gazed intently from me to Toby, and then proceeded to business. After
diligently observing the ailing member, he commenced manipulating it;
and on the supposition probably that the complaint had deprived the leg
of all sensation, began to pinch and hammer it in such a manner that I
absolutely roared with pain. Thinking that I was as capable of making
an application of thumps and pinches to the part as any one else, I
endeavoured to resist this species of medical treatment. But it was
not so easy a matter to get out of the clutches of the old wizard; he
fastened on the unfortunate limb as if it were something for which he
had been long seeking, and muttering some kind of incantation continued
his discipline, pounding it after a fashion that set me well nigh crazy;
while Mehevi, upon the same principle which prompts an affectionate
mother to hold a struggling child in a dentist’s chair, restrained me
in his powerful grasp, and actually encouraged the wretch in this
infliction of torture.

Almost frantic with rage and pain, I yelled like a bedlamite; while
Toby, throwing himself into all the attitudes of a posture-master,
vainly endeavoured to expostulate with the natives by signs and
gestures. To have looked at my companion, as, sympathizing with my
sufferings, he strove to put an end to them, one would have thought
that he was the deaf and dumb alphabet incarnated. Whether my tormentor
yielded to Toby’s entreaties, or paused from sheer exhaustion, I do not
know; but all at once he ceased his operations, and at the same time the
chief relinquishing his hold upon me, I fell back, faint and breathless
with the agony I had endured.

My unfortunate limb was now left much in the same condition as a
rump-steak after undergoing the castigating process which precedes
cooking. My physician, having recovered from the fatigues of his
exertions, as if anxious to make amends for the pain to which he had
subjected me, now took some herbs out of a little wallet that was
suspended from his waist, and moistening them in water, applied them
to the inflamed part, stooping over it at the same time, and either
whispering a spell, or having a little confidential chat with some
imaginary demon located in the calf of my leg. My limb was now swathed
in leafy bandages, and grateful to Providence for the cessation of
hostilities, I was suffered to rest.

Mehevi shortly after rose to depart; but before he went he spoke
authoritatively to one of the natives whom he addressed as Kory-Kory;
and from the little I could understand of what took place, pointed
him out to me as a man whose peculiar business thenceforth would be to
attend upon my person. I am not certain that I comprehended as much as
this at the time, but the subsequent conduct of my trusty body-servant
fully assured me that such must have been the case.

I could not but be amused at the manner in which the chief addressed me
upon this occasion, talking to me for at least fifteen or twenty minutes
as calmly as if I could understand every word that he said. I remarked
this peculiarity very often afterwards in many other of the islanders.

Mehevi having now departed, and the family physician having likewise
made his exit, we were left about sunset with ten or twelve natives, who
by this time I had ascertained composed the household of which Toby and
I were members. As the dwelling to which we had been first introduced
was the place of my permanent abode while I remained in the valley,
and as I was necessarily placed upon the most intimate footing with its
occupants, I may as well here enter into a little description of it
and its inhabitants. This description will apply also to nearly all the
other dwelling-places in the vale, and will furnish some idea of the
generality of the natives.

Near one side of the valley, and about midway up the ascent of a rather
abrupt rise of ground waving with the richest verdure, a number of large
stones were laid in successive courses, to the height of nearly
eight feet, and disposed in such a manner that their level surface
corresponded in shape with the habitation which was perched upon it. A
narrow space, however, was reserved in front of the dwelling, upon the
summit of this pile of stones (called by the natives a ‘pi-pi’),
which being enclosed by a little picket of canes, gave it somewhat the
appearance of a verandah. The frame of the house was constructed of
large bamboos planted uprightly, and secured together at intervals by
transverse stalks of the light wood of the habiscus, lashed with thongs
of bark. The rear of the tenement--built up with successive ranges of
cocoanut boughs bound one upon another, with their leaflets cunningly
woven together--inclined a little from the vertical, and extended from
the extreme edge of the ‘pi-pi’ to about twenty feet from its surface;
whence the shelving roof--thatched with the long tapering leaves of the
palmetto--sloped steeply off to within about five feet of the floor;
leaving the eaves drooping with tassel-like appendages over the front
of the habitation. This was constructed of light and elegant canes in a
kind of open screenwork, tastefully adorned with bindings of variegated
sinnate, which served to hold together its various parts. The sides of
the house were similarly built; thus presenting three quarters for the
circulation of the air, while the whole was impervious to the rain.

In length this picturesque building was perhaps twelve yards, while
in breadth it could not have exceeded as many feet. So much for the
exterior; which, with its wire-like reed-twisted sides, not a little
reminded me of an immense aviary.

Stooping a little, you passed through a narrow aperture in its front;
and facing you, on entering, lay two long, perfectly straight, and
well-polished trunks of the cocoanut tree, extending the full length of
the dwelling; one of them placed closely against the rear, and the other
lying parallel with it some two yards distant, the interval between
them being spread with a multitude of gaily-worked mats, nearly all of a
different pattern. This space formed the common couch and lounging place
of the natives, answering the purpose of a divan in Oriental countries.
Here would they slumber through the hours of the night, and recline
luxuriously during the greater part of the day. The remainder of the
floor presented only the cool shining surfaces of the large stones of
which the ‘pi-pi’ was composed.

From the ridge-pole of the house hung suspended a number of large
packages enveloped in coarse tappa; some of which contained festival
dresses, and various other matters of the wardrobe, held in high
estimation. These were easily accessible by means of a line, which,
passing over the ridge-pole, had one end attached to a bundle, while
with the other, which led to the side of the dwelling and was there
secured, the package could be lowered or elevated at pleasure.

Against the farther wall of the house were arranged in tasteful figures
a variety of spears and javelins, and other implements of savage
warfare. Outside of the habitation, and built upon the piazza-like area
in its front, was a little shed used as a sort of larder or pantry, and
in which were stored various articles of domestic use and convenience.
A few yards from the pi-pi was a large shed built of cocoanut boughs,
where the process of preparing the ‘poee-poee’ was carried on, and all
culinary operations attended to.

Thus much for the house, and its appurtenances; and it will be readily
acknowledged that a more commodious and appropriate dwelling for the
climate and the people could not possibly be devised. It was cool, free
to admit the air, scrupulously clean, and elevated above the dampness
and impurities of the ground.

But now to sketch the inmates; and here I claim for my tried servitor
and faithful valet Kory-Kory the precedence of a first description. As
his character will be gradually unfolded in the course of my narrative,
I shall for the present content myself with delineating his personal
appearance. Kory-Kory, though the most devoted and best natured
serving-man in the world, was, alas! a hideous object to look upon. He
was some twenty-five years of age, and about six feet in height, robust
and well made, and of the most extraordinary aspect. His head was
carefully shaven with the exception of two circular spots, about the
size of a dollar, near the top of the cranium, where the hair, permitted
to grow of an amazing length, was twisted up in two prominent knots,
that gave him the appearance of being decorated with a pair of horns.
His beard, plucked out by the root from every other part of his face,
was suffered to droop in hairy pendants, two of which garnished his
under lip, and an equal number hung from the extremity of his chin.

Kory-Kory, with a view of improving the handiwork of nature, and
perhaps prompted by a desire to add to the engaging expression of
his countenance, had seen fit to embellish his face with three broad
longitudinal stripes of tattooing, which, like those country roads that
go straight forward in defiance of all obstacles, crossed his nasal
organ, descended into the hollow of his eyes, and even skirted the
borders of his mouth. Each completely spanned his physiognomy; one
extending in a line with his eyes, another crossing the face in the
vicinity of the nose, and the third sweeping along his lips from ear
to ear. His countenance thus triply hooped, as it were, with tattooing,
always reminded me of those unhappy wretches whom I have sometimes
observed gazing out sentimentally from behind the grated bars of a
prison window; whilst the entire body of my savage valet, covered all
over with representations of birds and fishes, and a variety of most
unaccountable-looking creatures, suggested to me the idea of a pictorial
museum of natural history, or an illustrated copy of ‘Goldsmith’s
Animated Nature.’

But it seems really heartless in me to write thus of the poor islander,
when I owe perhaps to his unremitting attentions the very existence I
now enjoy. Kory-Kory, I mean thee no harm in what I say in regard to
thy outward adornings; but they were a little curious to my unaccustomed
sight, and therefore I dilate upon them. But to underrate or forget thy
faithful services is something I could never be guilty of, even in the
giddiest moment of my life.

The father of my attached follower was a native of gigantic frame, and
had once possessed prodigious physical powers; but the lofty form was
now yielding to the inroads of time, though the hand of disease seemed
never to have been laid upon the aged warrior. Marheyo--for such was
his name--appeared to have retired from all active participation in the
affairs of the valley, seldom or never accompanying the natives in
their various expeditions; and employing the greater part of his time
in throwing up a little shed just outside the house, upon which he was
engaged to my certain knowledge for four months, without appearing
to make any sensible advance. I suppose the old gentleman was in his
dotage, for he manifested in various ways the characteristics which mark
this particular stage of life.

I remember in particular his having a choice pair of ear-ornaments,
fabricated from the teeth of some sea-monster. These he would
alternately wear and take off at least fifty times in the course of the
day, going and coming from his little hut on each occasion with all the
tranquillity imaginable. Sometimes slipping them through the slits
in his ears, he would seize his spear--which in length and slightness
resembled a fishing-pole--and go stalking beneath the shadows of the
neighbouring groves, as if about to give a hostile meeting to some
cannibal knight. But he would soon return again, and hiding his weapon
under the projecting eaves of the house, and rolling his clumsy trinkets
carefully in a piece of tappa, would resume his more pacific operations
as quietly as if he had never interrupted them.

But despite his eccentricities, Marheyo was a most paternal and
warm-hearted old fellow, and in this particular not a little resembled
his son Kory-Kory. The mother of the latter was the mistress of the
family, and a notable housewife, and a most industrious old lady she
was. If she did not understand the art of making jellies, jams, custard,
tea-cakes, and such like trashy affairs, she was profoundly skilled in
the mysteries of preparing ‘amar’, ‘poee-poee’, and ‘kokoo’, with other
substantial matters.

She was a genuine busy-body; bustling about the house like a country
landlady at an unexpected arrival; for ever giving the young girls tasks
to perform, which the little hussies as often neglected; poking into
every corner, and rummaging over bundles of old tappa, or making a
prodigious clatter among the calabashes. Sometimes she might have been
seen squatting upon her haunches in front of a huge wooden basin, and
kneading poee-poee with terrific vehemence, dashing the stone pestle
about as if she would shiver the vessel into fragments; on other
occasions, galloping about the valley in search of a particular kind
of leaf, used in some of her recondite operations, and returning home,
toiling and sweating, with a bundle of it, under which most women would
have sunk.

To tell the truth, Kory-Kory’s mother was the only industrious person
in all the valley of Typee; and she could not have employed herself more
actively had she been left an exceedingly muscular and destitute widow,
with an inordinate ate supply of young children, in the bleakest part
of the civilized world. There was not the slightest necessity for the
greater portion of the labour performed by the old lady: but she seemed
to work from some irresistible impulse; her limbs continually swaying to
and fro, as if there were some indefatigable engine concealed within her
body which kept her in perpetual motion.

Never suppose that she was a termagant or a shrew for all this; she had
the kindliest heart in the world, and acted towards me in particular
in a truly maternal manner, occasionally putting some little morsel of
choice food into my hand, some outlandish kind of savage sweetmeat or
pastry, like a doting mother petting a sickly urchin with tarts
and sugar plums. Warm indeed are my remembrances of the dear, good,
affectionate old Tinor!

Besides the individuals I have mentioned, there belonged to the
household three young men, dissipated, good-for-nothing, roystering
blades of savages, who were either employed in prosecuting love affairs
with the maidens of the tribe, or grew boozy on ‘arva’ and tobacco in
the company of congenial spirits, the scapegraces of the valley.

Among the permanent inmates of the house were likewise several lovely
damsels, who instead of thrumming pianos and reading novels, like
more enlightened young ladies, substituted for these employments the
manufacture of a fine species of tappa; but for the greater portion of
the time were skipping from house to house, gadding and gossiping with
their acquaintances.

From the rest of these, however, I must except the beauteous nymph
Fayaway, who was my peculiar favourite. Her free pliant figure was the
very perfection of female grace and beauty. Her complexion was a rich
and mantling olive, and when watching the glow upon her cheeks I could
almost swear that beneath the transparent medium there lurked the
blushes of a faint vermilion.

The face of this girl was a rounded oval, and each feature as perfectly
formed as the heart or imagination of man could desire.

Her full lips, when parted with a smile, disclosed teeth of dazzling
whiteness and when her rosy mouth opened with a burst of merriment, they
looked like the milk-white seeds of the ‘arta,’ a fruit of the valley,
which, when cleft in twain, shows them reposing in rows on each side,
imbedded in the red and juicy pulp. Her hair of the deepest brown,
parted irregularly in the middle, flowed in natural ringlets over her
shoulders, and whenever she chanced to stoop, fell over and hid from
view her lovely bosom. Gazing into the depths of her strange blue
eyes, when she was in a contemplative mood, they seemed most placid yet
unfathomable; but when illuminated by some lively emotion, they beamed
upon the beholder like stars. The hands of Fayaway were as soft and
delicate as those of any countess; for an entire exemption from rude
labour marks the girlhood and even prime of a Typee woman’s life. Her
feet, though wholly exposed, were as diminutive and fairly shaped as
those which peep from beneath the skirts of a Lima lady’s dress. The
skin of this young creature, from continual ablutions and the use of
mollifying ointments, was inconceivably smooth and soft.

I may succeed, perhaps, in particularizing some of the individual
features of Fayaway’s beauty, but that general loveliness of appearance
which they all contributed to produce I will not attempt to describe.
The easy unstudied graces of a child of nature like this, breathing from
infancy an atmosphere of perpetual summer, and nurtured by the simple
fruits of the earth; enjoying a perfect freedom from care and anxiety,
and removed effectually from all injurious tendencies, strike the eye in
a manner which cannot be pourtrayed. This picture is no fancy sketch; it
is drawn from the most vivid recollections of the person delineated.

Were I asked if the beauteous form of Fayaway was altogether free from
the hideous blemish of tattooing, I should be constrained to answer that
it was not. But the practitioners of the barbarous art, so remorseless
in their inflictions upon the brawny limbs of the warriors of the tribe,
seem to be conscious that it needs not the resources of their profession
to augment the charms of the maidens of the vale.

The females are very little embellished in this way, and Fayaway, and
all the other young girls of her age, were even less so than those of
their sex more advanced in years. The reason of this peculiarity will
be alluded to hereafter. All the tattooing that the nymph in question
exhibited upon her person may be easily described. Three minute dots, no
bigger than pin-heads, decorated each lip, and at a little distance were
not at all discernible. Just upon the fall of the shoulder were drawn
two parallel lines half an inch apart, and perhaps three inches in
length, the interval being filled with delicately executed figures.
These narrow bands of tattooing, thus placed, always reminded me of
those stripes of gold lace worn by officers in undress, and which are in
lieu of epaulettes to denote their rank.

Thus much was Fayaway tattooed. The audacious hand which had gone so far
in its desecrating work stopping short, apparently wanting the heart to
proceed.

But I have omitted to describe the dress worn by this nymph of the
valley.

Fayaway--I must avow the fact--for the most part clung to the primitive
and summer garb of Eden. But how becoming the costume!

It showed her fine figure to the best possible advantage; and nothing
could have been better adapted to her peculiar style of beauty. On
ordinary occasions she was habited precisely as I have described the two
youthful savages whom we had met on first entering the valley. At other
times, when rambling among the groves, or visiting at the houses of her
acquaintances, she wore a tunic of white tappa, reaching from her waist
to a little below the knees; and when exposed for any length of time to
the sun, she invariably protected herself from its rays by a floating
mantle of--the same material, loosely gathered about the person. Her
gala dress will be described hereafter.

As the beauties of our own land delight in bedecking themselves with
fanciful articles of jewellery, suspending them from their ears, hanging
them about their necks, and clasping them around their wrists; so
Fayaway and her companions were in the habit of ornamenting themselves
with similar appendages.

Flora was their jeweller. Sometimes they wore necklaces of small
carnation flowers, strung like rubies upon a fibre of tappa, or
displayed in their ears a single white bud, the stem thrust backward
through the aperture, and showing in front the delicate petals folded
together in a beautiful sphere, and looking like a drop of the purest
pearl. Chaplets too, resembling in their arrangement the strawberry
coronal worn by an English peeress, and composed of intertwined leaves
and blossoms, often crowned their temples; and bracelets and anklets
of the same tasteful pattern were frequently to be seen. Indeed, the
maidens of the island were passionately fond of flowers, and never
wearied of decorating their persons with them; a lovely trait in their
character, and one that ere long will be more fully alluded to.

Though in my eyes, at least, Fayaway was indisputably the loveliest
female I saw in Typee, yet the description I have given of her will in
some measure apply to nearly all the youthful portion of her sex in the
valley. Judge ye then, reader, what beautiful creatures they must have
been.




CHAPTER TWELVE

OFFICIOUSNESS OF KORY-KORY--HIS DEVOTION--A BATH IN THE STREAM--WANT
OF REFINEMENT OF THE TYPEE DAMSELS--STROLL WITH MEHEVI--A TYPEE
HIGHWAY--THE TABOO GROVES--THE HOOLAH HOOLAH GROUND--THE TI--TIMEWORN
SAVAGES--HOSPITALITY OF MEHEVI--MIDNIGHT MUSINGS--ADVENTURES IN THE
DARK--DISTINGUISHED HONOURS PAID TO THE VISITORS--STRANGE PROCESSION AND
RETURN TO THE HOUSE OF MARHEYO


When Mehevi had departed from the house, as related in the preceding
chapter, Kory-Kory commenced the functions of the post assigned him.
He brought out, various kinds of food; and, as if I were an infant,
insisted upon feeding me with his own hands. To this procedure I, of
course, most earnestly objected, but in vain; and having laid a calabash
of kokoo before me, he washed his fingers in a vessel of water, and then
putting his hands into the dish and rolling the food into little balls,
put them one after another into my mouth. All my remonstrances against
this measure only provoked so great a clamour on his part, that I
was obliged to acquiesce; and the operation of feeding being thus
facilitated, the meal was quickly despatched. As for Toby, he was
allowed to help himself after his own fashion.

The repast over, my attendant arranged the mats for repose, and, bidding
me lie down, covered me with a large robe of tappa, at the same time
looking approvingly upon me, and exclaiming ‘Ki-Ki, nuee nuee, ah! moee
moee motarkee’ (eat plenty, ah! sleep very good). The philosophy of
this sentiment I did not pretend to question; for deprived of sleep for
several preceding nights, and the pain of my limb having much abated, I
now felt inclined to avail myself of the opportunity afforded me.

The next morning, on waking, I found Kory-Kory stretched out on one side
of me, while my companion lay upon the other. I felt sensibly refreshed
after a night of sound repose, and immediately agreed to the proposition
of my valet that I should repair to the water and wash, although
dreading the suffering that the exertion might produce. From this
apprehension, however, I was quickly relieved; for Kory-Kory, leaping
from the pi-pi, and then backing himself up against it, like a porter
in readiness to shoulder a trunk, with loud vociferations and a
superabundance of gestures, gave me to understand that I was to mount
upon his back and be thus transported to the stream, which flowed
perhaps two hundred yards from the house.

Our appearance upon the verandah in front of the habitation drew
together quite a crowd, who stood looking on and conversing with one
another in the most animated manner. They reminded one of a group of
idlers gathered about the door of a village tavern when the equipage
of some distinguished traveller is brought round previously to his
departure. As soon as I clasped my arms about the neck of the devoted
fellow, and he jogged off with me, the crowd--composed chiefly of young
girls and boys--followed after, shouting and capering with infinite
glee, and accompanied us to the banks of the stream.

On gaining it, Kory-Kory, wading up to his hips in the water, carried me
half way across, and deposited me on a smooth black stone which rose a
few inches above the surface. The amphibious rabble at our heels plunged
in after us, and climbing to the summit of the grass-grown rocks with
which the bed of the brook was here and there broken, waited curiously
to witness our morning ablutions.

Somewhat embarrassed by the presence of the female portion of the
company, and feeling my cheeks burning with bashful timidity, I formed
a primitive basin by joining my hands together, and cooled my blushes
in the water it contained; then removing my frock, bent over and washed
myself down to my waist in the stream. As soon as Kory-Kory comprehended
from my motions that this was to be the extent of my performance, he
appeared perfectly aghast with astonishment, and rushing towards me,
poured out a torrent of words in eager deprecation of so limited an
operation, enjoining me by unmistakable signs to immerse my whole body.
To this I was forced to consent; and the honest fellow regarding me as a
froward, inexperienced child, whom it was his duty to serve at the risk
of offending, lifted me from the rocks, and tenderly bathed my limbs.
This over, and resuming my seat, I could not avoid bursting into
admiration of the scene around me.

From the verdant surfaces of the large stones that lay scattered about,
the natives were now sliding off into the water, diving and ducking
beneath the surface in all directions--the young girls springing
buoyantly into the air, and revealing their naked forms to the waist,
with their long tresses dancing about their shoulders, their eyes
sparkling like drops of dew in the sun, and their gay laughter pealing
forth at every frolicsome incident. On the afternoon of the day that I
took my first bath in the valley, we received another visit from Mehevi.
The noble savage seemed to be in the same pleasant mood, and was quite
as cordial in his manner as before. After remaining about an hour, he
rose from the mats, and motioning to leave the house, invited Toby and
myself to accompany him. I pointed to my leg; but Mehevi in his turn
pointed to Kory-Kory, and removed that objection; so, mounting upon the
faithful fellow’s shoulders again--like the old man of the sea astride
of Sindbad--I followed after the chief.

The nature of the route we now pursued struck me more forcibly than
anything I had yet seen, as illustrating the indolent disposition of
the islanders. The path was obviously the most beaten one in the
valley, several others leading from each side into it, and perhaps for
successive generations it had formed the principal avenue of the place.
And yet, until I grew more familiar with its impediments, it seemed as
difficult to travel as the recesses of a wilderness. Part of it swept
around an abrupt rise of ground, the surface of which was broken by
frequent inequalities, and thickly strewn with projecting masses of
rocks, whose summits were often hidden from view by the drooping foliage
of the luxurious vegetation. Sometimes directly over, sometimes evading
these obstacles with a wide circuit, the path wound along;--one moment
climbing over a sudden eminence smooth with continued wear, then
descending on the other side into a steep glen, and crossing the flinty
channel of a brook. Here it pursued the depths of a glade, occasionally
obliging you to stoop beneath vast horizontal branches; and now you
stepped over huge trunks and boughs that lay rotting across the track.

Such was the grand thoroughfare of Typee. After proceeding a little
distance along it--Kory-Kory panting and blowing with the weight of
his burden--I dismounted from his back, and grasping the long spear of
Mehevi in my hand, assisted my steps over the numerous obstacles of
the road; preferring this mode of advance to one which, from the
difficulties of the way, was equally painful to myself and my wearied
servitor.

Our journey was soon at an end; for, scaling a sudden height, we came
abruptly upon the place of our destination. I wish that it were possible
to sketch in words this spot as vividly as I recollect it.

Here were situated the Taboo groves of the valley--the scene of many a
prolonged feast, of many a horrid rite. Beneath the dark shadows of
the consecrated bread-fruit trees there reigned a solemn twilight--a
cathedral-like gloom. The frightful genius of pagan worship seemed to
brood in silence over the place, breathing its spell upon every object
around. Here and there, in the depths of these awful shades, half
screened from sight by masses of overhanging foliage, rose the
idolatrous altars of the savages, built of enormous blocks of black and
polished stone, placed one upon another, without cement, to the height
of twelve or fifteen feet, and surmounted by a rustic open temple,
enclosed with a low picket of canes, within which might be seen, in
various stages of decay, offerings of bread-fruit and cocoanuts, and the
putrefying relics of some recent sacrifice.

In the midst of the wood was the hallowed ‘Hoolah Hoolah’ ground--set
apart for the celebration of the fantastical religious ritual of these
people--comprising an extensive oblong pi-pi, terminating at either end
in a lofty terraced altar, guarded by ranks of hideous wooden idols, and
with the two remaining sides flanked by ranges of bamboo sheds, opening
towards the interior of the quadrangle thus formed. Vast trees, standing
in the middle of this space, and throwing over it an umbrageous shade,
had their massive trunks built round with slight stages, elevated a few
feet above the ground, and railed in with canes, forming so many rustic
pulpits, from which the priests harangued their devotees.

This holiest of spots was defended from profanation by the strictest
edicts of the all-pervading ‘taboo’, which condemned to instant death
the sacrilegious female who should enter or touch its sacred precincts,
or even so much as press with her feet the ground made holy by the
shadows that it cast.

Access was had to the enclosure through an embowered entrance, on one
side, facing a number of towering cocoanut trees, planted at intervals
along a level area of a hundred yards. At the further extremity of this
space was to be seen a building of considerable size, reserved for the
habitation of the priests and religious attendants of the groves.

In its vicinity was another remarkable edifice, built as usual upon the
summit of a pi-pi, and at least two hundred feet in length, though not
more than twenty in breadth. The whole front of this latter structure
was completely open, and from one end to the other ran a narrow
verandah, fenced in on the edge of the pi-pi with a picket of canes.
Its interior presented the appearance of an immense lounging place, the
entire floor being strewn with successive layers of mats, lying between
parallel trunks of cocoanut trees, selected for the purpose from the
straightest and most symmetrical the vale afforded.

To this building, denominated in the language of the natives the ‘Ti’,
Mehevi now conducted us. Thus far we had been accompanied by a troop of
the natives of both sexes; but as soon as we approached its vicinity,
the females gradually separated themselves from the crowd, and standing
aloof, permitted us to pass on. The merciless prohibitions of the
taboo extended likewise to this edifice, and were enforced by the
same dreadful penalty that secured the Hoolah-Hoolah ground from the
imaginary pollution of a woman’s presence.

On entering the house, I was surprised to see six muskets ranged against
the bamboo on one side, from the barrels of which depended as many small
canvas pouches, partly filled with powder.

Disposed about these muskets, like the cutlasses that decorate the
bulkhead of a man-of-war’s cabin, were a great variety of rude spears
and paddles, javelins, and war-clubs. This then, said I to Toby, must be
the armoury of the tribe.

As we advanced further along the building, we were struck with the
aspect of four or five hideous old wretches, on whose decrepit forms
time and tattooing seemed to have obliterated every trace of humanity.
Owing to the continued operation of this latter process, which only
terminates among the warriors of the island after all the figures
stretched upon their limbs in youth have been blended together--an
effect, however, produced only in cases of extreme longevity--the bodies
of these men were of a uniform dull green colour--the hue which the
tattooing gradually assumes as the individual advances in age. Their
skin had a frightful scaly appearance, which, united with its singular
colour, made their limbs not a little resemble dusty specimens of
verde-antique. Their flesh, in parts, hung upon them in huge folds, like
the overlapping plaits on the flank of a rhinoceros. Their heads were
completely bald, whilst their faces were puckered into a thousand
wrinkles, and they presented no vestige of a beard. But the most
remarkable peculiarity about them was the appearance of their feet;
the toes, like the radiating lines of the mariner’s compass, pointed
to every quarter of the horizon. This was doubtless attributable to
the fact, that during nearly a hundred years of existence the said toes
never had been subjected to any artificial confinement, and in their
old age, being averse to close neighbourhood, bid one another keep open
order.

These repulsive-looking creatures appeared to have lost the use of their
lower limbs altogether; sitting upon the floor cross-legged in a state
of torpor. They never heeded us in the least, scarcely looking conscious
of our presence, while Mehevi seated us upon the mats, and Kory-Kory
gave utterance to some unintelligible gibberish.

In a few moments a boy entered with a wooden trencher of poee-poee; and
in regaling myself with its contents I was obliged again to submit to
the officious intervention of my indefatigable servitor. Various other
dishes followed, the chief manifesting the most hospitable importunity
in pressing us to partake, and to remove all bashfulness on our part,
set us no despicable example in his own person.

The repast concluded, a pipe was lighted, which passed from mouth to
mouth, and yielding to its soporific influence, the quiet of the place,
and the deepening shadows of approaching night, my companion and I sank
into a kind of drowsy repose, while the chief and Kory-Kory seemed to be
slumbering beside us.

I awoke from an uneasy nap, about midnight, as I supposed; and, raising
myself partly from the mat, became sensible that we were enveloped
in utter darkness. Toby lay still asleep, but our late companions had
disappeared. The only sound that interrupted the silence of the place
was the asthmatic breathing of the old men I have mentioned, who reposed
at a little distance from us. Besides them, as well as I could judge,
there was no one else in the house.

Apprehensive of some evil, I roused my comrade, and we were engaged in a
whispered conference concerning the unexpected withdrawal of the natives
when all at once, from the depths of the grove, in full view of us
where we lay, shoots of flame were seen to rise, and in a few moments
illuminated the surrounding trees, casting, by contrast, into still
deeper gloom the darkness around us.

While we continued gazing at this sight, dark figures appeared moving
to and fro before the flames; while others, dancing and capering about,
looked like so many demons.

Regarding this new phenomenon with no small degree of trepidation, I
said to my companion, ‘What can all this mean, Toby?’

‘Oh, nothing,’ replied he; ‘getting the fire ready, I suppose.’

‘Fire!’ exclaimed I, while my heart took to beating like a trip-hammer,
‘what fire?’

‘Why, the fire to cook us, to be sure, what else would the cannibals be
kicking up such a row about if it were not for that?’

‘Oh, Toby! have done with your jokes; this is no time for them;
something is about to happen, I feel confident.’

‘Jokes, indeed?’ exclaimed Toby indignantly. ‘Did you ever hear me joke?
Why, for what do you suppose the devils have been feeding us up in this
kind of style during the last three days, unless it were for something
that you are too much frightened at to talk about? Look at that
Kory-Kory there!--has he not been stuffing you with his confounded
mushes, just in the way they treat swine before they kill them? Depend
upon it, we will be eaten this blessed night, and there is the fire we
shall be roasted by.’

This view of the matter was not at all calculated to allay my
apprehensions, and I shuddered when I reflected that we were indeed at
the mercy of a tribe of cannibals, and that the dreadful contingency
to which Toby had alluded was by no means removed beyond the bounds of
possibility.

‘There! I told you so! they are coming for us!’ exclaimed my companion
the next moment, as the forms of four of the islanders were seen in
bold relief against the illuminated back-ground mounting the pi-pi and
approaching towards us.

They came on noiselessly, nay stealthily, and glided along through the
gloom that surrounded us as if about to spring upon some object they
were fearful of disturbing before they should make sure of it.--Gracious
heaven! the horrible reflections which crowded upon me that moment.--A
cold sweat stood upon my brow, and spell-bound with terror I awaited my
fate!

Suddenly the silence was broken by the well-remembered tones of Mehevi,
and at the kindly accents of his voice my fears were immediately
dissipated. ‘Tommo, Toby, ki ki!’ (eat). He had waited to address us,
until he had assured himself that we were both awake, at which he seemed
somewhat surprised.

‘Ki ki! is it?’ said Toby in his gruff tones; ‘Well, cook us first, will
you--but what’s this?’ he added, as another savage appeared, bearing
before him a large trencher of wood containing some kind of steaming
meat, as appeared from the odours it diffused, and which he deposited at
the feet of Mehevi. ‘A baked baby, I dare say I but I will have none
of it, never mind what it is.--A pretty fool I should make of myself,
indeed, waked up here in the middle of the night, stuffing and guzzling,
and all to make a fat meal for a parcel of booby-minded cannibals one
of these mornings!--No, I see what they are at very plainly, so I am
resolved to starve myself into a bunch of bones and gristle, and then,
if they serve me up, they are welcome! But I say, Tommo, you are not
going to eat any of that mess there, in the dark, are you? Why, how can
you tell what it is?’

‘By tasting it, to be sure,’ said I, masticating a morsel that Kory-Kory
had just put in my mouth, ‘and excellently good it is, too, very much
like veal.’

‘A baked baby, by the soul of Captain Cook!’ burst forth Toby, with
amazing vehemence; ‘Veal? why there never was a calf on the island
till you landed. I tell you you are bolting down mouthfuls from a dead
Happar’s carcass, as sure as you live, and no mistake!’

Emetics and lukewarm water! What a sensation in the abdominal region!
Sure enough, where could the fiends incarnate have obtained meat? But I
resolved to satisfy myself at all hazards; and turning to Mehevi, I soon
made the ready chief understand that I wished a light to be brought.
When the taper came, I gazed eagerly into the vessel, and recognized the
mutilated remains of a juvenile porker! ‘Puarkee!’ exclaimed Kory-Kory,
looking complacently at the dish; and from that day to this I have never
forgotten that such is the designation of a pig in the Typee lingo.

The next morning, after being again abundantly feasted by the hospitable
Mehevi, Toby and myself arose to depart. But the chief requested us to
postpone our intention. ‘Abo, abo’ (Wait, wait), he said and accordingly
we resumed our seats, while, assisted by the zealous Kory-Kory, he
appeared to be engaged in giving directions to a number of the natives
outside, who were busily employed in making arrangements, the nature
of which we could not comprehend. But we were not left long in our
ignorance, for a few moments only had elapsed, when the chief beckoned
us to approach, and we perceived that he had been marshalling a kind of
guard of honour to escort us on our return to the house of Marheyo.

The procession was led off by two venerable-looking savages, each
provided with a spear, from the end of which streamed a pennon of
milk-white tappa. After them went several youths, bearing aloft
calabashes of poee-poee, and followed in their turn by four stalwart
fellows, sustaining long bamboos, from the tops of which hung
suspended, at least twenty feet from the ground, large baskets of
green bread-fruits. Then came a troop of boys, carrying bunches of ripe
bananas, and baskets made of the woven leaflets of cocoanut boughs,
filled with the young fruit of the tree, the naked shells stripped of
their husks peeping forth from the verdant wicker-work that surrounded
them. Last of all came a burly islander, holding over his head a wooden
trencher, in which lay disposed the remnants of our midnight feast,
hidden from view, however, by a covering of bread-fruit leaves.

Astonished as I was at this exhibition, I could not avoid smiling at
its grotesque appearance, and the associations it naturally called
up. Mehevi, it seemed, was bent on replenishing old Marheyo’s larder,
fearful perhaps that without this precaution his guests might not fare
as well as they could desire.

As soon as I descended from the pi-pi, the procession formed anew,
enclosing us in its centre; where I remained part of the time, carried
by Kory-Kory, and occasionally relieving him from his burden by limping
along with spear. When we moved off in this order, the natives struck
up a musical recitative, which with various alternations, they continued
until we arrived at the place of our destination.

As we proceeded on our way, bands of young girls, darting from the
surrounding groves, hung upon our skirts, and accompanied us with shouts
of merriment and delight, which almost drowned the deep notes of the
recitative. On approaching old Marheyo’s domicile, its inmates rushed
out to receive us; and while the gifts of Mehevi were being disposed of,
the superannuated warrior did the honours of his mansion with all the
warmth of hospitality evinced by an English squire when he regales his
friends at some fine old patrimonial mansion.




CHAPTER THIRTEEN

ATTEMPT TO PROCURE RELIEF FROM NUKUHEVA--PERILOUS ADVENTURE OF TOBY IN
THE HAPPAR MOUNTAINS--ELOQUENCE OF KORY-KORY


Amidst these novel scenes a week passed away almost imperceptibly. The
natives, actuated by some mysterious impulse, day after day redoubled
their attentions to us. Their manner towards us was unaccountable.
Surely, thought I, they would not act thus if they meant us any harm.
But why this excess of deferential kindness, or what equivalent can they
imagine us capable of rendering them for it?

We were fairly puzzled. But despite the apprehensions I could not
dispel, the horrible character imputed to these Typees appeared to be
wholly undeserved.

‘Why, they are cannibals!’ said Toby on one occasion when I eulogized
the tribe. ‘Granted,’ I replied, ‘but a more humane, gentlemanly and
amiable set of epicures do not probably exist in the Pacific.’

But, notwithstanding the kind treatment we received, I was too familiar
with the fickle disposition of savages not to feel anxious to withdraw
from the valley, and put myself beyond the reach of that fearful death
which, under all these smiling appearances, might yet menace us. But
here there was an obstacle in the way of doing so. It was idle for me
to think of moving from the place until I should have recovered from the
severe lameness that afflicted me; indeed my malady began seriously to
alarm me; for, despite the herbal remedies of the natives, it continued
to grow worse and worse. Their mild applications, though they soothed
the pain, did not remove the disorder, and I felt convinced that without
better aid I might anticipate long and acute suffering.

But how was this aid to be procured? From the surgeons of the French
fleet, which probably still lay in the bay of Nukuheva, it might easily
have been obtained, could I have made my case known to them. But how
could that be effected?

At last, in the exigency to which I was reduced, I proposed to Toby that
he should endeavour to go round to Nukuheva, and if he could not
succeed in returning to the valley by water, in one of the boats of the
squadron, and taking me off, he might at least procure me some proper
medicines, and effect his return overland.

My companion listened to me in silence, and at first did not appear to
relish the idea. The truth was, he felt impatient to escape from the
place, and wished to avail himself of our present high favour with
the natives to make good our retreat, before we should experience some
sudden alteration in their behaviour. As he could not think of leaving
me in my helpless condition, he implored me to be of good cheer; assured
me that I should soon be better, and enabled in a few days to return
with him to Nukuheva.

Added to this, he could not bear the idea of again returning to this
dangerous place; and as for the expectation of persuading the Frenchmen
to detach a boat’s crew for the purpose of rescuing me from the Typees,
he looked upon it as idle; and with arguments that I could not answer,
urged the improbability of their provoking the hostilities of the clan
by any such measure; especially, as for the purpose of quieting its
apprehensions, they had as yet refrained from making any visit to the
bay. ‘And even should they consent,’ said Toby, ‘they would only produce
a commotion in the valley, in which we might both be sacrificed by these
ferocious islanders.’ This was unanswerable; but still I clung to the
belief that he might succeed in accomplishing the other part of my plan;
and at last I overcame his scruples, and he agreed to make the attempt.

As soon as we succeeded in making the natives understand our intention,
they broke out into the most vehement opposition to the measure, and
for a while I almost despaired of obtaining their consent. At the bare
thought of one of us leaving them, they manifested the most lively
concern. The grief and consternation of Kory-Kory, in particular, was
unbounded; he threw himself into a perfect paroxysm of gestures which
were intended to convey to us not only his abhorrence of Nukuheva
and its uncivilized inhabitants, but also his astonishment that after
becoming acquainted with the enlightened Typees, we should evince the
least desire to withdraw, even for a time, from their agreeable society.

However, I overbore his objections by appealing to my lameness; from
which I assured the natives I should speedily recover if Toby were
permitted to obtain the supplies I needed.

It was agreed that on the following morning my companion should depart,
accompanied by some one or two of the household, who should point out to
him an easy route, by which the bay might be reached before sunset.

At early dawn of the next day, our habitation was astir. One of the
young men mounted into an adjoining cocoanut tree, and threw down a
number of the young fruit, which old Marheyo quickly stripped of the
green husks, and strung together upon a short pole. These were intended
to refresh Toby on his route.

The preparations being completed, with no little emotion I bade my
companion adieu. He promised to return in three days at farthest; and,
bidding me keep up my spirits in the interval, turned round the corner
of the pi-pi, and, under the guidance of the venerable Marheyo, was
soon out of sight. His departure oppressed me with melancholy, and,
re-entering the dwelling, I threw myself almost in despair upon the
matting of the floor.

In two hours’ time the old warrior returned, and gave me to understand
that after accompanying my companion a little distance, and showing him
the route, he had left him journeying on his way.

It was about noon of this same day, a season which these people are wont
to pass in sleep, that I lay in the house, surrounded by its slumbering
inmates, and painfully affected by the strange silence which prevailed.
All at once I thought I heard a faint shout, as if proceeding from
some persons in the depth of the grove which extended in front of our
habitation.

The sounds grew louder and nearer, and gradually the whole valley rang
with wild outcries. The sleepers around me started to their feet in
alarm, and hurried outside to discover the cause of the commotion.
Kory-Kory, who had been the first to spring up, soon returned almost
breathless, and nearly frantic with the excitement under which he seemed
to be labouring. All that I could understand from him was that some
accident had happened to Toby. Apprehensive of some dreadful calamity,
I rushed out of the house, and caught sight of a tumultuous crowd, who,
with shrieks and lamentations, were just emerging from the grove
bearing in their arms some object, the sight of which produced all this
transport of sorrow. As they drew near, the men redoubled their
cries, while the girls, tossing their bare arms in the air, exclaimed
plaintively, ‘Awha! awha! Toby mukee moee!’--Alas! alas! Toby is killed!

In a moment the crowd opened, and disclosed the apparently lifeless body
of my companion home between two men, the head hanging heavily against
the breast of the foremost. The whole face, neck, back, and bosom were
covered with blood, which still trickled slowly from a wound behind the
temple. In the midst of the greatest uproar and confusion the body was
carried into the house and laid on a mat. Waving the natives off to give
room and air, I bent eagerly over Toby, and, laying my hand upon the
breast, ascertained that the heart still beat. Overjoyed at this, I
seized a calabash of water, and dashed its contents upon his face, then
wiping away the blood, anxiously examined the wound. It was about three
inches long, and on removing the clotted hair from about it, showed the
skull laid completely bare. Immediately with my knife I cut away the
heavy locks, and bathed the part repeatedly in water.

In a few moments Toby revived, and opening his eyes for a second--closed
them again without speaking. Kory-Kory, who had been kneeling beside me,
now chafed his limbs gently with the palms of his hands, while a young
girl at his head kept fanning him, and I still continued to moisten his
lips and brow. Soon my poor comrade showed signs of animation, and I
succeeded in making him swallow from a cocoanut shell a few mouthfuls of
water.

Old Tinor now appeared, holding in her hand some simples she had
gathered, the juice of which she by signs besought me to squeeze into
the wound. Having done so, I thought it best to leave Toby undisturbed
until he should have had time to rally his faculties. Several times he
opened his lips, but fearful for his safety I enjoined silence. In the
course of two or three hours, however, he sat up, and was sufficiently
recovered to tell me what had occurred.

‘After leaving the house with Marheyo,’ said Toby, ‘we struck across the
valley, and ascended the opposite heights. Just beyond them, my guide
informed me, lay the valley of Happar, while along their summits, and
skirting the head of the vale, was my route to Nukuheva. After mounting
a little way up the elevation my guide paused, and gave me to understand
that he could not accompany me any farther, and by various signs
intimated that he was afraid to approach any nearer the territories of
the enemies of his tribe. He however pointed out my path, which now
lay clearly before me, and bidding me farewell, hastily descended the
mountain.

‘Quite elated at being so near the Happars, I pushed up the acclivity,
and soon gained its summit. It tapered to a sharp ridge, from whence
I beheld both the hostile valleys. Here I sat down and rested for a
moment, refreshing myself with my cocoanuts. I was soon again pursuing
my way along the height, when suddenly I saw three of the islanders, who
must have just come out of Happar valley, standing in the path ahead of
me. They were each armed with a heavy spear, and one from his appearance
I took to be a chief. They sung out something, I could not understand
what, and beckoned me to come on.

‘Without the least hesitation I advanced towards them, and had
approached within about a yard of the foremost, when, pointing angrily
into the Typee valley, and uttering some savage exclamation, he wheeled
round his weapon like lightning, and struck me in a moment to the
ground. The blow inflicted this wound, and took away my senses. As soon
as I came to myself, I perceived the three islanders standing a little
distance off, and apparently engaged in some violent altercation
respecting me.

‘My first impulse was to run for it; but, in endeavouring to rise, I
fell back, and rolled down a little grassy precipice. The shock seemed
to rally my faculties; so, starting to my feet, I fled down the path I
had just ascended. I had no need to look behind me, for, from the yells
I heard, I knew that my enemies were in full pursuit. Urged on by their
fearful outcries, and heedless of the injury I had received--though
the blood flowing from the wound trickled over into my eyes and almost
blinded me--I rushed down the mountain side with the speed of the wind.
In a short time I had descended nearly a third of the distance, and the
savages had ceased their cries, when suddenly a terrific howl burst upon
my ear, and at the same moment a heavy javelin darted past me as I fled,
and stuck quivering in a tree close to me. Another yell followed, and
a second spear and a third shot through the air within a few feet of my
body, both of them piercing the ground obliquely in advance of me. The
fellows gave a roar of rage and disappointment; but they were afraid, I
suppose, of coming down further into the Typee valley, and so abandoned
the chase. I saw them recover their weapons and turn back; and I
continued my descent as fast as I could.

‘What could have caused this ferocious attack on the part of these
Happars I could not imagine, unless it were that they had seen me
ascending the mountain with Marheyo, and that the mere fact of coming
from the Typee valley was sufficient to provoke them.

‘As long as I was in danger I scarcely felt the wound I had received;
but when the chase was over I began to suffer from it. I had lost my
hat in the flight, and the run scorched my bare head. I felt faint
and giddy; but, fearful of falling to the ground beyond the reach of
assistance, I staggered on as well as I could, and at last gained the
level of the valley, and then down I sank; and I knew nothing more until
I found myself lying upon these mats, and you stooping over me with the
calabash of water.’

Such was Toby’s account of this sad affair. I afterwards learned that,
fortunately, he had fallen close to a spot where the natives go for
fuel. A party of them caught sight of him as he fell, and sounding
the alarm, had lifted him up; and after ineffectually endeavouring to
restore him at the brook, had hurried forward with him to the house.

This incident threw a dark cloud over our prospects. It reminded us that
we were hemmed in by hostile tribes, whose territories we could not hope
to pass, on our route to Nukuheva, without encountering the effects of
their savage resentment. There appeared to be no avenue opened to our
escape but the sea, which washed the lower extremities of the vale.

Our Typee friends availed themselves of the recent disaster of Toby to
exhort us to a due appreciation of the blessings we enjoyed among them,
contrasting their own generous reception of us with the animosity of
their neighbours. They likewise dwelt upon the cannibal propensities of
the Happars, a subject which they were perfectly aware could not fail
to alarm us; while at the same time they earnestly disclaimed all
participation in so horrid a custom. Nor did they omit to call upon
us to admire the natural loveliness of their own abode, and the lavish
abundance with which it produced all manner of luxuriant fruits;
exalting it in this particular above any of the surrounding valleys.

Kory-Kory seemed to experience so heartfelt a desire to infuse into our
minds proper views on these subjects, that, assisted in his endeavours
by the little knowledge of the language we had acquired, he actually
made us comprehend a considerable part of what he said. To facilitate
our correct apprehension of his meaning, he at first condensed his ideas
into the smallest possible compass.

‘Happar keekeeno nuee,’ he exclaimed, ‘nuee, nuee, ki ki
kannaka!--ah! owle motarkee!’ which signifies, ‘Terrible fellows those
Happars!--devour an amazing quantity of men!--ah, shocking bad!’
Thus far he explained himself by a variety of gestures, during
the performance of which he would dart out of the house, and point
abhorrently towards the Happar valley; running in to us again with
a rapidity that showed he was fearful he would lose one part of
his meaning before he could complete the other; and continuing his
illustrations by seizing the fleshy part of my arm in his teeth,
intimating by the operation that the people who lived over in that
direction would like nothing better than to treat me in that manner.

Having assured himself that we were fully enlightened on this point, he
proceeded to another branch of his subject. ‘Ah! Typee mortakee!--nuee,
nuee mioree--nuee, nuee wai--nuee, nuee poee-poee--nuee, nuee kokoo--ah!
nuee, nuee kiki--ah! nuee, nuee, nuee!’ Which literally interpreted
as before, would imply, ‘Ah, Typee! isn’t it a fine place though!--no
danger of starving here, I tell you!--plenty of bread-fruit--plenty of
water--plenty of pudding--ah! plenty of everything! ah! heaps, heaps
heaps!’ All this was accompanied by a running commentary of signs and
gestures which it was impossible not to comprehend.

As he continued his harangue, however, Kory-Kory, in emulation of our
more polished orators, began to launch out rather diffusely into other
branches of his subject, enlarging probably upon the moral reflections
it suggested; and proceeded in such a strain of unintelligible and
stunning gibberish, that he actually gave me the headache for the rest
of the day.




CHAPTER FOURTEEN

A GREAT EVENT HAPPENS IN THE VALLEY--THE ISLAND TELEGRAPH--SOMETHING
BEFALLS TOBY--FAYAWAY DISPLAYS A TENDER HEART--MELANCHOLY
REFLECTIONS--MYSTERIOUS CONDUCT OF THE ISLANDERS--DEVOTION OF
KORY-KORY--A RURAL COUCH--A LUXURY--KORY-KORY STRIKES A LIGHT A LA TYPEE


In the course of a few days Toby had recovered from the effects of
his adventure with the Happar warriors; the wound on his head rapidly
healing under the vegetable treatment of the good Tinor. Less fortunate
than my companion however, I still continued to languish under a
complaint, the origin and nature of which were still a mystery. Cut off
as I was from all intercourse with the civilized world, and feeling the
inefficacy of anything the natives could do to relieve me; knowing,
too, that so long as I remained in my present condition, it would
be impossible for me to leave the valley, whatever opportunity might
present itself; and apprehensive that ere long we might be exposed to
some caprice on the part of the islanders, I now gave up all hopes
of recovery, and became a prey to the most gloomy thoughts. A deep
dejection fell upon me, which neither the friendly remonstrances of
my companion, the devoted attentions of Kory-Kory nor all the soothing
influences of Fayaway could remove.

One morning as I lay on the mats in the house, plunged in melancholy
reverie, and regardless of everything around me, Toby, who had left me
about an hour, returned in haste, and with great glee told me to cheer
up and be of good heart; for he believed, from what was going on among
the natives, that there were boats approaching the bay.

These tidings operated upon me like magic. The hour of our deliverance
was at hand, and starting up, I was soon convinced that something
unusual was about to occur. The word ‘botee! botee!’ was vociferated in
all directions; and shouts were heard in the distance, at first
feebly and faintly; but growing louder and nearer at each successive
repetition, until they were caught up by a fellow in a cocoanut tree a
few yards off, who sounding them in turn, they were reiterated from a
neighbouring grove, and so died away gradually from point to point, as
the intelligence penetrated into the farthest recess of the valley. This
was the vocal telegraph of the islanders; by means of which condensed
items of information could be carried in a very few minutes from the
sea to their remotest habitation, a distance of at least eight or nine
miles. On the present occasion it was in active operation; one piece of
information following another with inconceivable rapidity.

The greatest commotion now appeared to prevail. At every fresh item of
intelligence the natives betrayed the liveliest interest, and redoubled
the energy with which they employed themselves in collecting fruit to
sell to the expected visitors. Some were tearing off the husks from
cocoanuts; some perched in the trees were throwing down bread-fruit
to their companions, who gathered them into heaps as they fell; while
others were plying their fingers rapidly in weaving leafen baskets in
which to carry the fruit.

There were other matters too going on at the same time. Here you would
see a stout warrior polishing his spear with a bit of old tappa, or
adjusting the folds of the girdle about his waist; and there you might
descry a young damsel decorating herself with flowers, as if having
in her eye some maidenly conquest; while, as in all cases of hurry
and confusion in every part of the world, a number of individuals kept
hurrying to and fro, with amazing vigour and perseverance, doing nothing
themselves, and hindering others.

Never before had we seen the islanders in such a state of bustle and
excitement; and the scene furnished abundant evidence of the fact--that
it was only at long intervals any such events occur.

When I thought of the length of time that might intervene before a
similar chance of escape would be presented, I bitterly lamented that
I had not the power of availing myself effectually of the present
opportunity.

From all that we could gather, it appeared that the natives were fearful
of arriving too late upon the beach, unless they made extraordinary
exertions. Sick and lame as I was, I would have started with Toby at
once, had not Kory-Kory not only refused to carry me, but manifested
the most invincible repugnance to our leaving the neighbourhood of the
house. The rest of the savages were equally opposed to our wishes, and
seemed grieved and astonished at the earnestness of my solicitations.
I clearly perceived that while my attendant avoided all appearance of
constraining my movements, he was nevertheless determined to thwart my
wishes. He seemed to me on this particular occasion, as well as often
afterwards, to be executing the orders of some other person with regard
to me, though at the same time feeling towards me the most lively
affection.

Toby, who had made up his mind to accompany the islanders if possible,
as soon as they were in readiness to depart, and who for that reason had
refrained from showing the same anxiety that I had done, now represented
to me that it was idle for me to entertain the hope of reaching the
beach in time to profit by any opportunity that might then be presented.

‘Do you not see,’ said he, ‘the savages themselves are fearful of being
too late, and I should hurry forward myself at once did I not think that
if I showed too much eagerness I should destroy all our hopes of reaping
any benefit from this fortunate event. If you will only endeavour to
appear tranquil or unconcerned, you will quiet their suspicions, and I
have no doubt they will then let me go with them to the beach, supposing
that I merely go out of curiosity. Should I succeed in getting down to
the boats, I will make known the condition in which I have left you, and
measures may then be taken to secure our escape.’

In the expediency of this I could not but acquiesce; and as the natives
had now completed their preparations, I watched with the liveliest
interest the reception that Toby’s application might meet with. As soon
as they understood from my companion that I intended to remain, they
appeared to make no objection to his proposition, and even hailed it
with pleasure. Their singular conduct on this occasion not a little
puzzled me at the time, and imparted to subsequent events an additional
mystery.

The islanders were now to be seen hurrying along the path which led to
the sea. I shook Toby warmly by the hand, and gave him my Payta hat
to shield his wounded head from the sun, as he had lost his own. He
cordially returned the pressure of my hand, and solemnly promising to
return as soon as the boats should leave the shore, sprang from my side,
and the next minute disappeared in a turn of the grove.

In spite of the unpleasant reflections that crowded upon my mind, I
could not but be entertained by the novel and animated sight which by
now met my view. One after another the natives crowded along the narrow
path, laden with every variety of fruit. Here, you might have seen one,
who, after ineffectually endeavouring to persuade a surly porker to be
conducted in leading strings, was obliged at last to seize the perverse
animal in his arms, and carry him struggling against his naked breast,
and squealing without intermission. There went two, who at a little
distance might have been taken for the Hebrew spies, on their return to
Moses with the goodly bunch of grape. One trotted before the other at a
distance of a couple of yards, while between them, from a pole resting
on the shoulders, was suspended a huge cluster of bananas, which swayed
to and fro with the rocking gait at which they proceeded. Here ran
another, perspiring with his exertions, and bearing before him a
quantity of cocoanuts, who, fearful of being too late, heeded not the
fruit that dropped from his basket, and appeared solely intent upon
reaching his destination, careless how many of his cocoanuts kept
company with him.

In a short time the last straggler was seen hurrying on his way, and the
faint shouts of those in advance died insensibly upon the ear. Our
part of the valley now appeared nearly deserted by its inhabitants,
Kory-Kory, his aged father, and a few decrepit old people, being all
that were left.

Towards sunset the islanders in small parties began to return from
the beach, and among them, as they drew near to the house, I sought to
descry the form of my companion. But one after another they passed the
dwelling, and I caught no glimpse of him. Supposing, however, that he
would soon appear with some of the members of the household, I quieted
my apprehensions, and waited patiently to see him advancing in company
with the beautiful Fayaway. At last, I perceived Tinor coming forward,
followed by the girls and young men who usually resided in the house of
Marheyo; but with them came not my comrade, and, filled with a thousand
alarms, I eagerly sought to discover the cause of his delay.

My earnest questions appeared to embarrass the natives greatly. All
their accounts were contradictory: one giving me to understand that
Toby would be with me in a very short time; another that he did not know
where he was; while a third, violently inveighing, against him, assured
me that he had stolen away, and would never come back. It appeared
to me, at the time, that in making these various statements they
endeavoured to conceal from me some terrible disaster, lest the
knowledge of it should overpower me.

Fearful lest some fatal calamity had overtaken him, I sought out young
Fayaway, and endeavoured to learn from her, if possible, the truth.

This gentle being had early attracted my regard, not only from her
extraordinary beauty, but from the attractive cast of her countenance,
singularly expressive of intelligence and humanity. Of all the natives
she alone seemed to appreciate the effect which the peculiarity of the
circumstances in which we were placed had produced upon the minds of my
companion and myself. In addressing me--especially when I lay reclining
upon the mats suffering from pain--there was a tenderness in her manner
which it was impossible to misunderstand or resist. Whenever she entered
the house, the expression of her face indicated the liveliest sympathy
for me; and moving towards the place where I lay, with one arm slightly
elevated in a gesture of pity, and her large glistening eyes gazing
intently into mine, she would murmur plaintively, ‘Awha! awha! Tommo,’
and seat herself mournfully beside me.

Her manner convinced me that she deeply compassionated my situation, as
being removed from my country and friends, and placed beyond the reach
of all relief. Indeed, at times I was almost led to believe that her
mind was swayed by gentle impulses hardly to be anticipated from one in
her condition; that she appeared to be conscious there were ties rudely
severed, which had once bound us to our homes; that there were sisters
and brothers anxiously looking forward to our return, who were, perhaps,
never more to behold us.

In this amiable light did Fayaway appear in my eyes; and reposing full
confidence in her candour and intelligence, I now had recourse to her,
in the midst of my alarm, with regard to my companion.

My questions evidently distressed her. She looked round from one to
another of the bystanders, as if hardly knowing what answer to give me.
At last, yielding to my importunities, she overcame her scruples, and
gave me to understand that Toby had gone away with the boats which had
visited the bay, but had promised to return at the expiration of three
days. At first I accused him of perfidiously deserting me; but as I grew
more composed, I upbraided myself for imputing so cowardly an action
to him, and tranquillized myself with the belief that he had availed
himself, of the opportunity to go round to Nukuheva, in order to make
some arrangement by which I could be removed from the valley. At any
rate, thought I, he will return with the medicines I require, and then,
as soon as I recover, there will be no difficulty in the way of our
departure.

Consoling myself with these reflections, I lay down that night in a
happier frame of mind than I had done for some time. The next day passed
without any allusion to Toby on the part of the natives, who seemed
desirous of avoiding all reference to the subject. This raised some
apprehensions in my breast; but when night came, I congratulated myself
that the second day had now gone by, and that on the morrow Toby would
again be with me. But the morrow came and went, and my companion did
not appear. Ah! thought I, he reckons three days from the morning of his
departure,--tomorrow he will arrive. But that weary day also closed upon
me, without his return. Even yet I would not despair; I thought that
something detained him--that he was waiting for the sailing of a boat,
at Nukuheva, and that in a day or two at farthest I should see him
again. But day after day of renewed disappointment passed by; at last
hope deserted me, and I fell a victim to despair.

Yes; thought I, gloomily, he has secured his own escape, and cares not
what calamity may befall his unfortunate comrade. Fool that I was,
to suppose that any one would willingly encounter the perils of this
valley, after having once got beyond its limits! He has gone, and has
left me to combat alone all the dangers by which I am surrounded. Thus
would I sometimes seek to derive a desperate consolation from dwelling
upon the perfidity of Toby: whilst at other times I sunk under the
bitter remorse which I felt as having by my own imprudence brought upon
myself the fate which I was sure awaited me.

At other times I thought that perhaps after all these treacherous
savages had made away with him, and thence the confusion into which
they were thrown by my questions, and their contradictory answers, or he
might be a captive in some other part of the valley, or, more dreadful
still, might have met with that fate at which my very soul shuddered.
But all these speculations were vain; no tidings of Toby ever reached
me; he had gone never to return.

The conduct of the islanders appeared inexplicable. All reference to my
lost comrade was carefully evaded, and if at any time they were forced
to make some reply to my frequent inquiries on the subject, they would
uniformly denounce him as an ungrateful runaway, who had deserted
his friend, and taken himself off to that vile and detestable place
Nukuheva.

But whatever might have been his fate, now that he was gone the natives
multiplied their acts of kindness and attention towards myself, treating
me with a degree of deference which could hardly have been surpassed had
I been some celestial visitant. Kory-Kory never for one moment left my
side, unless it were to execute my wishes. The faithful fellow, twice
every day, in the cool of the morning and in the evening, insisted upon
carrying me to the stream, and bathing me in its refreshing water.

Frequently in the afternoon he would carry me to a particular part of
the stream, where the beauty of the scene produced a soothing influence
upon my mind. At this place the waters flowed between grassy banks,
planted with enormous bread-fruit trees, whose vast branches interlacing
overhead, formed a leafy canopy; near the stream were several smooth
black rocks. One of these, projecting several feet above the surface
of the water, had upon its summit a shallow cavity, which, filled with
freshly-gathered leaves, formed a delightful couch.

Here I often lay for hours, covered with a gauze-like veil of tappa,
while Fayaway, seated beside me, and holding in her hand a fan woven
from the leaflets of a young cocoanut bough, brushed aside the insects
that occasionally lighted on my face, and Kory-Kory, with a view of
chasing away my melancholy, performed a thousand antics in the water
before us.

As my eye wandered along this romantic stream, it would fall upon the
half-immersed figure of a beautiful girl, standing in the transparent
water, and catching in a little net a species of diminutive shell-fish,
of which these people are extraordinarily fond. Sometimes a chattering
group would be seated upon the edge of a low rock in the midst of the
brook, busily engaged in thinning and polishing the shells of cocoanuts,
by rubbing them briskly with a small stone in the water, an operation
which soon converts them into a light and elegant drinking vessel,
somewhat resembling goblets made of tortoise shell.

But the tranquillizing influence of beautiful scenery, and the
exhibition of human life under so novel and charming an aspect were not
my only sources of consolation.

Every evening the girls of the house gathered about me on the mats, and
after chasing away Kory-Kory from my side--who nevertheless, retired
only to a little distance and watched their proceedings with the most
jealous attention--would anoint my whole body with a fragrant oil,
squeezed from a yellow root, previously pounded between a couple of
stones, and which in their language is denominated ‘aka’. And most
refreshing and agreeable are the juices of the ‘aka’, when applied to
ones, limbs by the soft palms of sweet nymphs, whose bright eyes are
beaming upon you with kindness; and I used to hail with delight the
daily recurrence of this luxurious operation, in which I forgot all my
troubles, and buried for the time every feeling of sorrow.

Sometimes in the cool of the evening my devoted servitor would lead me
out upon the pi-pi in front of the house, and seating me near its edge,
protect my body from the annoyance of the insects which occasionally
hovered in the air, by wrapping me round with a large roll of tappa.
He then bustled about, and employed himself at least twenty minutes in
adjusting everything to secure my personal comfort.

Having perfected his arrangements, he would get my pipe, and, lighting
it, would hand it to me. Often he was obliged to strike a light for the
occasion, and as the mode he adopted was entirely different from what I
had ever seen or heard of before I will describe it.

A straight, dry, and partly decayed stick of the Hibiscus, about six
feet in length, and half as many inches in diameter, with a small, bit
of wood not more than a foot long, and scarcely an inch wide, is as
invariably to be met with in every house in Typee as a box of lucifer
matches in the corner of a kitchen cupboard at home.

The islander, placing the larger stick obliquely against some object,
with one end elevated at an angle of forty-five degrees, mounts astride
of it like an urchin about to gallop off upon a cane, and then grasping
the smaller one firmly in both hands, he rubs its pointed end slowly
up and down the extent of a few inches on the principal stick, until at
last he makes a narrow groove in the wood, with an abrupt termination
at the point furthest from him, where all the dusty particles which the
friction creates are accumulated in a little heap.

At first Kory-Kory goes to work quite leisurely, but gradually quickens
his pace, and waxing warm in the employment, drives the stick furiously
along the smoking channel, plying his hands to and fro with amazing
rapidity, the perspiration starting from every pore. As he approaches
the climax of his effort, he pants and gasps for breath, and his eyes
almost start from their sockets with the violence of his exertions. This
is the critical stage of the operation; all his previous labours
are vain if he cannot sustain the rapidity of the movement until the
reluctant spark is produced. Suddenly he stops, becoming perfectly
motionless. His hands still retain their hold of the smaller stick,
which is pressed convulsively against the further end of the channel
among the fine powder there accumulated, as if he had just pierced
through and through some little viper that was wriggling and struggling
to escape from his clutches. The next moment a delicate wreath of smoke
curls spirally into the air, the heap of dusty particles glows with
fire, and Kory-Kory, almost breathless, dismounts from his steed.

This operation appeared to me to be the most laborious species of work
performed in Typee; and had I possessed a sufficient intimacy with the
language to have conveyed my ideas upon the subject, I should certainly
have suggested to the most influential of the natives the expediency of
establishing a college of vestals to be centrally located in the valley,
for the purpose of keeping alive the indispensable article of fire; so
as to supersede the necessity of such a vast outlay of strength and
good temper, as were usually squandered on these occasions. There might,
however, be special difficulties in carrying this plan into execution.

What a striking evidence does this operation furnish of the wide
difference between the extreme of savage and civilized life. A gentleman
of Typee can bring up a numerous family of children and give them all
a highly respectable cannibal education, with infinitely less toil
and anxiety than he expends in the simple process of striking a light;
whilst a poor European artisan, who through the instrumentality of a
lucifer performs the same operation in one second, is put to his wit’s
end to provide for his starving offspring that food which the children
of a Polynesian father, without troubling their parents, pluck from the
branches of every tree around them.




CHAPTER FIFTEEN

KINDNESS OF MARHEYO AND THE REST OF THE ISLANDERS--A FULL DESCRIPTION OF
THE BREAD-FRUIT TREE--DIFFERENT MODES OF PREPARING THE FRUIT


All the inhabitants of the valley treated me with great kindness; but as
to the household of Marheyo, with whom I was now permanently domiciled,
nothing could surpass their efforts to minister to my comfort. To the
gratification of my palate they paid the most unwearied attention.
They continually invited me to partake of food, and when after eating
heartily I declined the viands they continued to offer me, they seemed
to think that my appetite stood in need of some piquant stimulant to
excite its activity.

In pursuance of this idea, old Marheyo himself would hie him away to
the sea-shore by the break of day, for the purpose of collecting
various species of rare sea-weed; some of which among these people are
considered a great luxury. After a whole day spent in this employment,
he would return about nightfall with several cocoanut shells filled with
different descriptions of kelp. In preparing these for use he manifested
all the ostentation of a professed cook, although the chief mystery of
the affair appeared to consist in pouring water in judicious quantities
upon the slimy contents of his cocoanut shells.

The first time he submitted one of these saline salads to my critical
attention I naturally thought that anything collected at such pains must
possess peculiar merits; but one mouthful was a complete dose; and great
was the consternation of the old warrior at the rapidity with which I
ejected his Epicurean treat.

How true it is, that the rarity of any particular article enhances
its value amazingly. In some part of the valley--I know not where, but
probably in the neighbourhood of the sea--the girls were sometimes in
the habit of procuring small quantities of salt, a thimble-full or
so being the result of the united labours of a party of five or six
employed for the greater part of the day. This precious commodity they
brought to the house, enveloped in multitudinous folds of leaves; and
as a special mark of the esteem in which they held me, would spread
an immense leaf on the ground, and dropping one by one a few minute
particles of the salt upon it, invite me to taste them.

From the extravagant value placed upon the article, I verily believe,
that with a bushel of common Liverpool salt all the real estate in Typee
might have been purchased. With a small pinch of it in one hand, and a
quarter section of a bread-fruit in the other, the greatest chief in the
valley would have laughed at all luxuries of a Parisian table.

The celebrity of the bread-fruit tree, and the conspicuous place it
occupies in a Typee bill of fare, induces me to give at some length
a general description of the tree, and the various modes in which the
fruit is prepared.

The bread-fruit tree, in its glorious prime, is a grand and towering
object, forming the same feature in a Marquesan landscape that the
patriarchal elm does in New England scenery. The latter tree it not a
little resembles in height, in the wide spread of its stalwart branches,
and in its venerable and imposing aspect.

The leaves of the bread-fruit are of great size, and their edges are cut
and scolloped as fantastically as those of a lady’s lace collar. As they
annually tend towards decay, they almost rival in brilliant variety
of their gradually changing hues the fleeting shades of the expiring
dolphin. The autumnal tints of our American forests, glorious as they
are, sink into nothing in comparison with this tree.

The leaf, in one particular stage, when nearly all the prismatic colours
are blended on its surface, is often converted by the natives into
a superb and striking head-dress. The principal fibre traversing its
length being split open a convenient distance, and the elastic sides of
the aperture pressed apart, the head is inserted between them, the leaf
drooping on one side, with its forward half turned jauntily up on the
brows, and the remaining part spreading laterally behind the ears.

The fruit somewhat resembles in magnitude and general appearance one of
our citron melons of ordinary size; but, unlike the citron, it has no
sectional lines drawn along the outside. Its surface is dotted all over
with little conical prominences, looking not unlike the knobs, on an
antiquated church door. The rind is perhaps an eighth of an inch in
thickness; and denuded of this at the time when it is in the greatest
perfection, the fruit presents a beautiful globe of white pulp, the
whole of which may be eaten, with the exception of a slender core, which
is easily removed.

The bread-fruit, however, is never used, and is indeed altogether unfit
to be eaten, until submitted in one form or other to the action of fire.

The most simple manner in which this operation is performed, and I
think, the best, consists in placing any number of the freshly plucked
fruit, when in a particular state of greenness, among the embers of a
fire, in the same way that you would roast a potato. After the lapse
of ten or fifteen minutes, the green rind embrowns and cracks, showing
through the fissures in its sides the milk-white interior. As soon as it
cools the rind drops off, and you then have the soft round pulp in its
purest and most delicious state. Thus eaten, it has a mild and pleasing
flavour.

Sometimes after having been roasted in the fire, the natives snatch it
briskly from the embers, and permitting it to slip out of the yielding
rind into a vessel of cold water, stir up the mixture, which they
call ‘bo-a-sho’. I never could endure this compound, and indeed the
preparation is not greatly in vogue among the more polite Typees.

There is one form, however, in which the fruit is occasionally served,
that renders it a dish fit for a king. As soon as it is taken from the
fire the exterior is removed, the core extracted, and the remaining part
is placed in a sort of shallow stone mortar, and briskly worked with
a pestle of the same substance. While one person is performing this
operation, another takes a ripe cocoanut, and breaking it in halves,
which they also do very cleverly, proceeds to grate the juicy meat into
fine particles. This is done by means of a piece of mother-of-pearl
shell, lashed firmly to the extreme end of a heavy stick, with its
straight side accurately notched like a saw. The stick is sometimes a
grotesquely-formed limb of a tree, with three or four branches twisting
from its body like so many shapeless legs, and sustaining it two or
three feet from the ground.

The native, first placing a calabash beneath the nose, as it were, of
his curious-looking log-steed, for the purpose of receiving the
grated fragments as they fall, mounts astride of it as if it were a
hobby-horse, and twirling the inside of his hemispheres of cocoanut
around the sharp teeth of the mother-of-pearl shell, the pure white meat
falls in snowy showers into the receptacle provided. Having obtained a
quantity sufficient for his purpose, he places it in a bag made of
the net-like fibrous substance attached to all cocoanut trees, and
compressing it over the bread-fruit, which being now sufficiently
pounded, is put into a wooden bowl--extracts a thick creamy milk. The
delicious liquid soon bubbles round the fruit, and leaves it at last
just peeping above its surface.

This preparation is called ‘kokoo’, and a most luscious preparation it
is. The hobby-horse and the pestle and mortar were in great requisition
during the time I remained in the house of Marheyo, and Kory-Kory had
frequent occasion to show his skill in their use.

But the great staple articles of food into which the bread-fruit is
converted by these natives are known respectively by the names of Amar
and Poee-Poee.

At a certain season of the year, when the fruit of the hundred groves
of the valley has reached its maturity, and hangs in golden spheres from
every branch, the islanders assemble in harvest groups, and garner in
the abundance which surrounds them.

The trees are stripped of their nodding burdens, which, easily freed
from the rind and core, are gathered together in capacious wooden
vessels, where the pulpy fruit is soon worked by a stone pestle,
vigorously applied, into a blended mass of a doughy consistency, called
by the natives ‘Tutao’. This is then divided into separate parcels,
which, after being made up into stout packages, enveloped in successive
folds of leaves, and bound round with thongs of bark, are stored away in
large receptacles hollowed in the earth, from whence they are drawn as
occasion may require. In this condition the Tutao sometimes remains for
years, and even is thought to improve by age. Before it is fit to be
eaten, however, it has to undergo an additional process. A primitive
oven is scooped in the ground, and its bottom being loosely covered
with stones, a large fire is kindled within it. As soon as the requisite
degree of heat is attained, the embers are removed, and the surface of
the stones being covered with thick layers of leaves, one of the large
packages of Tutao is deposited upon them and overspread with another
layer of leaves. The whole is then quickly heaped up with earth, and
forms a sloping mound.

The Tutao thus baked is called ‘Amar’; the action of the oven having
converted it into an amber-coloured caky substance, a little tart, but
not at all disagreeable to the taste.

By another and final process the ‘Amar’ is changed into ‘Poee-Poee’.
This transition is rapidly effected. The Amar is placed in a vessel, and
mixed with water until it gains a proper pudding-like consistency, when,
without further preparation, it is in readiness for use. This is the
form in which the ‘Tutao’ is generally consumed. The singular mode of
eating it I have already described.

Were it not that the bread-fruit is thus capable of being preserved for
a length of time, the natives might be reduced to a state of starvation;
for owing to some unknown cause the trees sometimes fail to bear fruit;
and on such occasions the islanders chiefly depend upon the supplies
they have been enabled to store away.

This stately tree, which is rarely met with upon the Sandwich Islands,
and then only of a very inferior quality, and at Tahiti does not abound
to a degree that renders its fruit the principal article of food,
attains its greatest excellence in the genial climate of the Marquesan
group, where it grows to an enormous magnitude, and flourishes in the
utmost abundance.




CHAPTER SIXTEEN

MELANCHOLY CONDITION--OCCURRENCE AT THE TI--ANECDOTE OF MARHEYO--SHAVING
THE HEAD OF A WARRIOR


In looking back to this period, and calling to remembrance the
numberless proofs of kindness and respect which I received from the
natives of the valley, I can scarcely understand how it was that, in the
midst of so many consolatory circumstances, my mind should still have
been consumed by the most dismal forebodings, and have remained a
prey to the profoundest melancholy. It is true that the suspicious
circumstances which had attended the disappearance of Toby were enough
of themselves to excite distrust with regard to the savages, in whose
power I felt myself to be entirely placed, especially when it was
combined with the knowledge that these very men, kind and respectful
as they were to me, were, after all, nothing better than a set of
cannibals.

But my chief source of anxiety, and that which poisoned every temporary
enjoyment, was the mysterious disease in my leg, which still remained
unabated. All the herbal applications of Tinor, united with the severer
discipline of the old leech, and the affectionate nursing of Kory-Kory,
had failed to relieve me. I was almost a cripple, and the pain I endured
at intervals was agonizing. The unaccountable malady showed no signs
of amendment: on the contrary, its violence increased day by day, and
threatened the most fatal results, unless some powerful means were
employed to counteract it. It seemed as if I were destined to sink
under this grievous affliction, or at least that it would hinder me from
availing myself of any opportunity of escaping from the valley.

An incident which occurred as nearly as I can estimate about three weeks
after the disappearance of Toby, convinced me that the natives, from
some reason or other, would interpose every possible obstacle to my
leaving them.

One morning there was no little excitement evinced by the people near
my abode, and which I soon discovered proceeded from a vague report
that boats, had been seen at a great distance approaching the bay.
Immediately all was bustle and animation. It so happened that day that
the pain I suffered having somewhat abated, and feeling in much better
spirits than usual, I had complied with Kory-Kory’s invitation to visit
the chief Mehevi at the place called the ‘Ti’, which I have before
described as being situated within the precincts of the Taboo Groves.
These sacred recesses were at no great distance from Marheyo’s
habitation, and lay between it and the sea; the path that conducted to
the beach passing directly in front of the Ti, and thence skirting along
the border of the groves.

I was reposing upon the mats, within the sacred building, in company
with Mehevi and several other chiefs, when the announcement was first
made. It sent a thrill of joy through my whole frame;--perhaps Toby was
about to return. I rose at once to my feet, and my instinctive impulse
was to hurry down to the beach, equally regardless of the distance that
separated me from it, and of my disabled condition. As soon as Mehevi
noticed the effect the intelligence had produced upon me, and the
impatience I betrayed to reach the sea, his countenance assumed that
inflexible rigidity of expression which had so awed me on the afternoon
of our arrival at the house of Marheyo. As I was proceeding to leave
the Ti, he laid his hand upon my shoulder, and said gravely, ‘abo, abo’
(wait, wait). Solely intent upon the one thought that occupied my mind,
and heedless of his request, I was brushing past him, when suddenly he
assumed a tone of authority, and told me to ‘moee’ (sit down). Though
struck by the alteration in his demeanour, the excitement under which I
laboured was too strong to permit me to obey the unexpected command,
and I was still limping towards the edge of the pi-pi with Kory-Kory
clinging to one arm in his efforts to restrain me, when the natives
around started to their feet, ranged themselves along the open front of
the building, while Mehevi looked at me scowlingly, and reiterated his
commands still more sternly.

It was at this moment, when fifty savage countenances were glaring upon
me, that I first truly experienced I was indeed a captive in the
valley. The conviction rushed upon me with staggering force, and I was
overwhelmed by this confirmation of my worst fears. I saw at once that
it was useless for me to resist, and sick at heart, I reseated myself
upon the mats, and for the moment abandoned myself to despair.

I now perceived the natives one after the other hurrying past the Ti and
pursuing the route that conducted to the sea. These savages, thought
I, will soon be holding communication with some of my own countrymen
perhaps, who with ease could restore me to liberty did they know of the
situation I was in. No language can describe the wretchedness which I
felt; and in the bitterness of my soul I imprecated a thousand curses on
the perfidious Toby, who had thus abandoned me to destruction. It was in
vain that Kory-Kory tempted me with food, or lighted my pipe, or sought
to attract my attention by performing the uncouth antics that
had sometimes diverted me. I was fairly knocked down by this last
misfortune, which, much as I had feared it, I had never before had the
courage calmly to contemplate.

Regardless of everything but my own sorrow, I remained in the Ti for
several hours, until shouts proceeding at intervals from the groves
beyond the house proclaimed the return of the natives from the beach.

Whether any boats visited the bay that morning or not, I never could
ascertain. The savages assured me that there had not--but I was inclined
to believe that by deceiving me in this particular they sought to allay
the violence of my grief. However that might be, this incident showed
plainly that the Typees intended to hold me a prisoner. As they still
treated me with the same sedulous attention as before, I was utterly
at a loss how to account for their singular conduct. Had I been in a
situation to instruct them in any of the rudiments of the mechanic arts,
or had I manifested a disposition to render myself in any way useful
among them, their conduct might have been attributed to some adequate
motive, but as it was, the matter seemed to me inexplicable.

During my whole stay on the island there occurred but two or three
instances where the natives applied to me with the view of availing
themselves of my superior information; and these now appear so ludicrous
that I cannot forbear relating them.

The few things we had brought from Nukuheva had been done up into a
small bundle which we had carried with us in our descent to the valley.
This bundle, the first night of our arrival, I had used as a pillow, but
on the succeeding morning, opening it for the inspection of the natives,
they gazed upon the miscellaneous contents as though I had just revealed
to them a casket of diamonds, and they insisted that so precious a
treasure should be properly secured. A line was accordingly attached to
it, and the other end being passed over the ridge-pole of the house, it
was hoisted up to the apex of the roof, where it hung suspended directly
over the mats where I usually reclined. When I desired anything from it
I merely raised my finger to a bamboo beside me, and taking hold of
the string which was there fastened, lowered the package. This was
exceedingly handy, and I took care to let the natives understand how
much I applauded the invention. Of this package the chief contents were
a razor with its case, a supply of needles and thread, a pound or two of
tobacco and a few yards of bright-coloured calico.

I should have mentioned that shortly after Toby’s disappearance,
perceiving the uncertainty of the time I might be obliged to remain in
the valley--if, indeed, I ever should escape from it--and considering
that my whole wardrobe consisted of a shirt and a pair of trousers, I
resolved to doff these garments at once, in order to preserve them in
a suitable condition for wear should I again appear among civilized
beings. I was consequently obliged to assume the Typee costume, a little
altered, however, to suit my own views of propriety, and in which I have
no doubt I appeared to as much advantage as a senator of Rome enveloped
in the folds of his toga. A few folds of yellow tappa tucked about my
waist, descended to my feet in the style of a lady’s petticoat, only
I did not have recourse to those voluminous paddings in the rear with
which our gentle dames are in the habit of augmenting the sublime
rotundity of their figures. This usually comprised my in-door dress;
whenever I walked out, I superadded to it an ample robe of the same
material, which completely enveloped my person, and screened it from the
rays of the sun.

One morning I made a rent in this mantle; and to show the islanders with
what facility it could be repaired, I lowered my bundle, and taking
from it a needle and thread, proceeded to stitch up the opening. They
regarded this wonderful application of science with intense admiration;
and whilst I was stitching away, old Marheyo, who was one of the
lookers-on, suddenly clapped his hand to his forehead, and rushing to
a corner of the house, drew forth a soiled and tattered strip of faded
calico which he must have procured some time or other in traffic on the
beach--and besought me eagerly to exercise a little of my art upon it.
I willingly complied, though certainly so stumpy a needle as mine never
took such gigantic strides over calico before. The repairs completed,
old Marheyo gave me a paternal hug; and divesting himself of his ‘maro’
(girdle), swathed the calico about his loins, and slipping the beloved
ornaments into his ears, grasped his spear and sallied out of the house,
like a valiant Templar arrayed in a new and costly suit of armour.

I never used my razor during my stay in the island, but although a
very subordinate affair, it had been vastly admired by the Typees; and
Narmonee, a great hero among them, who was exceedingly precise in the
arrangements of his toilet and the general adjustment of is person,
being the most accurately tattooed and laboriously horrified individual
in all the valley, thought it would be a great advantage to have it
applied to the already shaven crown of his head.

The implement they usually employ is a shark’s tooth, which is about as
well adapted to the purpose as a one-pronged fork for pitching hay. No
wonder, then, that the acute Narmonee perceived the advantage my razor
possessed over the usual implement. Accordingly, one day he requested as
a personal favour that I would just run over his head with the razor. In
reply, I gave him to understand that it was too dull, and could not be
used to any purpose without being previously sharpened. To assist my
meaning, I went through an imaginary honing process on the palm of my
hand. Narmonee took my meaning in an instant, and running out of the
house, returned the next moment with a huge rough mass of rock as big
as a millstone, and indicated to me that that was exactly the thing
I wanted. Of course there was nothing left for me but to proceed to
business, and I began scraping away at a great rate. He writhed and
wriggled under the infliction, but, fully convinced of my skill, endured
the pain like a martyr.

Though I never saw Narmonee in battle I will, from what I then observed,
stake my life upon his courage and fortitude. Before commencing
operations, his head had presented a surface of short bristling hairs,
and by the time I had concluded my unskilful operation it resembled not
a little a stubble field after being gone over with a harrow. However,
as the chief expressed the liveliest satisfaction at the result, I was
too wise to dissent from his opinion.




CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

IMPROVEMENT IN HEALTH AND SPIRITS--FELICITY OF THE
TYPEES--THEIR ENJOYMENTS COMPARED WITH THOSE OF MORE ENLIGHTENED
COMMUNITIES--COMPARATIVE WICKEDNESS OF CIVILIZED AND UNENLIGHTENED
PEOPLE--A SKIRMISH IN THE MOUNTAIN WITH THE WARRIORS OF HAPPAR


Day after day wore on, and still there was no perceptible change in the
conduct of the islanders towards me. Gradually I lost all knowledge of
the regular recurrence of the days of the week, and sunk insensibly into
that kind of apathy which ensues after some violent outburst of despair.
My limb suddenly healed, the swelling went down, the pain subsided, and
I had every reason to suppose I should soon completely recover from the
affliction that had so long tormented me.

As soon as I was enabled to ramble about the valley in company with the
natives, troops of whom followed me whenever I sallied out of the house,
I began to experience an elasticity of mind which placed me beyond the
reach of those dismal forebodings to which I had so lately been a prey.
Received wherever I went with the most deferential kindness; regaled
perpetually with the most delightful fruits; ministered to by dark-eyed
nymphs, and enjoying besides all the services of the devoted Kory-Kory,
I thought that, for a sojourn among cannibals, no man could have well
made a more agreeable one.

To be sure there were limits set to my wanderings. Toward the sea my
progress was barred by an express prohibition of the savages; and after
having made two or three ineffectual attempts to reach it, as much to
gratify my curiosity as anything else, I gave up the idea. It was in
vain to think of reaching it by stealth, since the natives escorted me
in numbers wherever I went, and not for one single moment that I can
recall to mind was I ever permitted to be alone.

The green and precipitous elevations that stood ranged around the
head of the vale where Marheyo’s habitation was situated effectually
precluded all hope of escape in that quarter, even if I could have
stolen away from the thousand eyes of the savages.

But these reflections now seldom obtruded upon me; I gave myself up to
the passing hour, and if ever disagreeable thoughts arose in my mind, I
drove them away. When I looked around the verdant recess in which I was
buried, and gazed up to the summits of the lofty eminence that hemmed me
in, I was well disposed to think that I was in the ‘Happy Valley’,
and that beyond those heights there was naught but a world of care
and anxiety. As I extended my wanderings in the valley and grew more
familiar with the habits of its inmates, I was fain to confess that,
despite the disadvantages of his condition, the Polynesian savage,
surrounded by all the luxurious provisions of nature, enjoyed an
infinitely happier, though certainly a less intellectual existence than
the self-complacent European.

The naked wretch who shivers beneath the bleak skies, and starves among
the inhospitable wilds of Tierra-del-Fuego, might indeed be made happier
by civilization, for it would alleviate his physical wants. But the
voluptuous Indian, with every desire supplied, whom Providence has
bountifully provided with all the sources of pure and natural enjoyment,
and from whom are removed so many of the ills and pains of life--what
has he to desire at the hands of Civilization? She may ‘cultivate his
mind--may elevate his thoughts,’--these I believe are the established
phrases--but will he be the happier? Let the once smiling and populous
Hawaiian islands, with their now diseased, starving, and dying natives,
answer the question. The missionaries may seek to disguise the matter
as they will, but the facts are incontrovertible; and the devoutest
Christian who visits that group with an unbiased mind, must go away
mournfully asking--‘Are these, alas! the fruits of twenty-five years of
enlightening?’

In a primitive state of society, the enjoyments of life, though few
and simple, are spread over a great extent, and are unalloyed; but
Civilization, for every advantage she imparts, holds a hundred evils in
reserve;--the heart-burnings, the jealousies, the social rivalries,
the family dissentions, and the thousand self-inflicted discomforts of
refined life, which make up in units the swelling aggregate of human
misery, are unknown among these unsophisticated people.

But it will be urged that these shocking unprincipled wretches are
cannibals. Very true; and a rather bad trait in their character it must
be allowed. But they are such only when they seek to gratify the passion
of revenge upon their enemies; and I ask whether the mere eating of
human flesh so very far exceeds in barbarity that custom which only
a few years since was practised in enlightened England:--a convicted
traitor, perhaps a man found guilty of honesty, patriotism, and suchlike
heinous crimes, had his head lopped off with a huge axe, his bowels
dragged out and thrown into a fire; while his body, carved into four
quarters, was with his head exposed upon pikes, and permitted to rot and
fester among the public haunts of men!

The fiend-like skill we display in the invention of all manner of
death-dealing engines, the vindictiveness with which we carry on our
wars, and the misery and desolation that follow in their train, are
enough of themselves to distinguish the white civilized man as the most
ferocious animal on the face of the earth.

His remorseless cruelty is seen in many of the institutions of our own
favoured land. There is one in particular lately adopted in one of the
States of the Union, which purports to have been dictated by the most
merciful considerations. To destroy our malefactors piece-meal, drying
up in their veins, drop by drop, the blood we are too chicken-hearted
to shed by a single blow which would at once put a period to their
sufferings, is deemed to be infinitely preferable to the old-fashioned
punishment of gibbeting--much less annoying to the victim, and more in
accordance with the refined spirit of the age; and yet how feeble is all
language to describe the horrors we inflict upon these wretches, whom we
mason up in the cells of our prisons, and condemn to perpetual solitude
in the very heart of our population.

But it is needless to multiply the examples of civilized barbarity; they
far exceed in the amount of misery they cause the crimes which we regard
with such abhorrence in our less enlightened fellow-creatures.

The term ‘Savage’ is, I conceive, often misapplied, and indeed, when I
consider the vices, cruelties, and enormities of every kind that spring
up in the tainted atmosphere of a feverish civilization, I am inclined
to think that so far as the relative wickedness of the parties is
concerned, four or five Marquesan Islanders sent to the United States
as Missionaries might be quite as useful as an equal number of Americans
despatched to the Islands in a similar capacity.

I once heard it given as an instance of the frightful depravity of a
certain tribe in the Pacific that they had no word in their language
to express the idea of virtue. The assertion was unfounded; but were
it otherwise, it might be met by stating that their language is almost
entirely destitute of terms to express the delightful ideas conveyed by
our endless catalogue of civilized crimes.

In the altered frame of mind to which I have referred, every object that
presented itself to my notice in the valley struck me in a new light,
and the opportunities I now enjoyed of observing the manners of its
inmates, tended to strengthen my favourable impressions. One peculiarity
that fixed my admiration was the perpetual hilarity reigning through the
whole extent of the vale.

There seemed to be no cares, griefs, troubles, or vexations, in all
Typee. The hours tripped along as gaily as the laughing couples down a
country dance.

There were none of those thousand sources of irritation that the
ingenuity of civilized man has created to mar his own felicity. There
were no foreclosures of mortgages, no protested notes, no bills payable,
no debts of honour in Typee; no unreasonable tailors and shoemakers
perversely bent on being paid; no duns of any description and battery
attorneys, to foment discord, backing their clients up to a quarrel,
and then knocking their heads together; no poor relations, everlastingly
occupying the spare bed-chamber, and diminishing the elbow room at the
family table; no destitute widows with their children starving on the
cold charities of the world; no beggars; no debtors’ prisons; no proud
and hard-hearted nabobs in Typee; or to sum up all in one word--no
Money! ‘That root of all evil’ was not to be found in the valley.

In this secluded abode of happiness there were no cross old women, no
cruel step-dames, no withered spinsters, no lovesick maidens, no sour
old bachelors, no inattentive husbands, no melancholy young men, no
blubbering youngsters, and no squalling brats. All was mirth, fun and
high good humour. Blue devils, hypochondria, and doleful dumps, went and
hid themselves among the nooks and crannies of the rocks.

Here you would see a parcel of children frolicking together the
live-long day, and no quarrelling, no contention, among them. The same
number in our own land could not have played together for the space of
an hour without biting or scratching one another. There you might have
seen a throng of young females, not filled with envyings of each other’s
charms, nor displaying the ridiculous affectations of gentility, nor
yet moving in whalebone corsets, like so many automatons, but free,
inartificially happy, and unconstrained.

There were some spots in that sunny vale where they would frequently
resort to decorate themselves with garlands of flowers. To have seen
them reclining beneath the shadows of one of the beautiful groves;
the ground about them strewn with freshly gathered buds and blossoms,
employed in weaving chaplets and necklaces, one would have thought
that all the train of Flora had gathered together to keep a festival in
honour of their mistress.

With the young men there seemed almost always some matter of diversion
or business on hand that afforded a constant variety of enjoyment. But
whether fishing, or carving canoes, or polishing their ornaments, never
was there exhibited the least sign of strife or contention among them.
As for the warriors, they maintained a tranquil dignity of demeanour,
journeying occasionally from house to house, where they were always sure
to be received with the attention bestowed upon distinguished guests.
The old men, of whom there were many in the vale, seldom stirred from
their mats, where they would recline for hours and hours, smoking and
talking to one another with all the garrulity of age.

But the continual happiness, which so far as I was able to judge
appeared to prevail in the valley, sprang principally from that
all-pervading sensation which Rousseau has told us be at one time
experienced, the mere buoyant sense of a healthful physical existence.
And indeed in this particular the Typees had ample reason to felicitate
themselves, for sickness was almost unknown. During the whole period of
my stay I saw but one invalid among them; and on their smooth skins you
observed no blemish or mark of disease.

The general repose, however, upon which I have just been descanting,
was broken in upon about this time by an event which proved that the
islanders were not entirely exempt from those occurrences which disturb
the quiet of more civilized communities.

Having now been a considerable time in the valley, I began to feel
surprised that the violent hostility subsisting between its inhabitants,
and those of the adjoining bay of Happar, should never have manifested
itself in any warlike encounter. Although the valiant Typees would often
by gesticulations declare their undying hatred against their enemies,
and the disgust they felt at their cannibal propensities; although they
dilated upon the manifold injuries they had received at their hands, yet
with a forbearance truly commendable, they appeared to sit down under
their grievances, and to refrain from making any reprisals. The Happars,
entrenched behind their mountains, and never even showing themselves on
their summits, did not appear to me to furnish adequate cause for that
excess of animosity evinced towards them by the heroic tenants of our
vale, and I was inclined to believe that the deeds of blood attributed
to them had been greatly exaggerated.

On the other hand, as the clamours of war had not up to this period
disturbed the serenity of the tribe, I began to distrust the truth of
those reports which ascribed so fierce and belligerent a character to
the Typee nation. Surely, thought I, all these terrible stories I have
heard about the inveteracy with which they carried on the feud, their
deadly intensity, of hatred and the diabolical malice with which they
glutted their revenge upon the inanimate forms of the slain, are nothing
more than fables, and I must confess that I experienced something like a
sense of regret at having my hideous anticipations thus disappointed.
I felt in some sort like a ‘prentice boy who, going to the play in the
expectation of being delighted with a cut-and-thrust tragedy, is almost
moved to tears of disappointment at the exhibition of a genteel comedy.

I could not avoid thinking that I had fallen in with a greatly traduced
people, and I moralized not a little upon the disadvantage of having a
bad name, which in this instance had given a tribe of savages, who
were as pacific as so many lambkins, the reputation of a confederacy of
giant-killers.

But subsequent events proved that I had been a little too premature in
coming to this conclusion. One, day about noon, happening to be at the
Ti, I had lain down on the mats with several of the chiefs, and had
gradually sunk into a most luxurious siesta, when I was awakened by
a tremendous outcry, and starting up beheld the natives seizing their
spears and hurrying out, while the most puissant of the chiefs, grasping
the six muskets which were ranged against the bamboos, followed after,
and soon disappeared in the groves. These movements were accompanied
by wild shouts, in which ‘Happar, Happar,’ greatly predominated. The
islanders were now seen running past the Ti, and striking across the
valley to the Happar side. Presently I heard the sharp report of a
musket from the adjoining hills, and then a burst of voices in the same
direction. At this the women who had congregated in the groves, set up
the most violent clamours, as they invariably do here as elsewhere on
every occasion of excitement and alarm, with a view of tranquillizing
their own minds and disturbing other people. On this particular
occasion they made such an outrageous noise, and continued it with such
perseverance, that for awhile, had entire volleys of musketry been fired
off in the neighbouring mountains, I should not have been able to have
heard them.

When this female commotion had a little subsided I listened eagerly for
further information. At last bang went another shot, and then a second
volley of yells from the hills. Again all was quiet, and continued so
for such a length of time that I began to think the contending armies
had agreed upon a suspension of hostilities; when pop went a third gun,
followed as before with a yell. After this, for nearly two hours
nothing occurred worthy of comment, save some straggling shouts from the
hillside, sounding like the halloos of a parcel of truant boys who had
lost themselves in the woods.

During this interval I had remained standing on the piazza of the ‘Ti,’
which directly fronted the Happar mountain, and with no one near me
but Kory-Kory and the old superannuated savages I have described. These
latter never stirred from their mats, and seemed altogether unconscious
that anything unusual was going on.

As for Kory-Kory, he appeared to think that we were in the midst of
great events, and sought most zealously to impress me with a due sense
of their importance. Every sound that reached us conveyed some momentous
item of intelligence to him. At such times, as if he were gifted with
second sight, he would go through a variety of pantomimic illustrations,
showing me the precise manner in which the redoubtable Typees were at
that very moment chastising the insolence of the enemy. ‘Mehevi hanna
pippee nuee Happar,’ he exclaimed every five minutes, giving me to
understand that under that distinguished captain the warriors of his
nation were performing prodigies of valour.

Having heard only four reports from the muskets, I was led to believe
that they were worked by the islanders in the same manner as the Sultan
Solyman’s ponderous artillery at the siege of Byzantium, one of them
taking an hour or two to load and train. At last, no sound whatever
proceeding from the mountains, I concluded that the contest had been
determined one way or the other. Such appeared, indeed, to be the case,
for in a little while a courier arrived at the ‘Ti’, almost breathless
with his exertions, and communicated the news of a great victory having
been achieved by his countrymen: ‘Happar poo arva!--Happar poo arva!’
(the cowards had fled). Kory-Kory was in ecstasies, and commenced a
vehement harangue, which, so far as I understood it, implied that the
result exactly agreed with his expectations, and which, moreover,
was intended to convince me that it would be a perfectly useless
undertaking, even for an army of fire-eaters, to offer battle to the
irresistible heroes of our valley. In all this I of course acquiesced,
and looked forward with no little interest to the return of the
conquerors, whose victory I feared might not have been purchased without
cost to themselves.

But here I was again mistaken; for Mehevi, in conducting his warlike
operations, rather inclined to the Fabian than to the Bonapartean
tactics, husbanding his resources and exposing his troops to no
unnecessary hazards. The total loss of the victors in this obstinately
contested affair was, in killed, wounded, and missing--one forefinger
and part of a thumb-nail (which the late proprietor brought along with
him in his hand), a severely contused arm, and a considerable effusion
of blood flowing from the thigh of a chief, who had received an ugly
thrust from a Happar spear. What the enemy had suffered I could not
discover, but I presume they had succeeded in taking off with them the
bodies of their slain.

Such was the issue of the battle, as far as its results came under my
observation: and as it appeared to be considered an event of prodigious
importance, I reasonably concluded that the wars of the natives were
marked by no very sanguinary traits. I afterwards learned how the
skirmish had originated. A number of the Happars had been discovered
prowling for no good purpose on the Typee side of the mountain; the
alarm sounded, and the invaders, after a protracted resistance, had been
chased over the frontier. But why had not the intrepid Mehevi carried
the war into Happar? Why had he not made a descent into the hostile
vale, and brought away some trophy of his victory--some materials for
the cannibal entertainment which I had heard usually terminated every
engagement? After all, I was much inclined to believe that these
shocking festivals must occur very rarely among the islanders, if,
indeed, they ever take place.

For two or three days the late event was the theme of general comment;
after which the excitement gradually wore away, and the valley resumed
its accustomed tranquility.




CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

SWIMMING IN COMPANY WITH THE GIRLS OF THE VALLEY--A CANOE--EFFECTS
OF THE TABOO--A PLEASURE EXCURSION ON THE POND--BEAUTIFUL FREAK OF
FAYAWAY--MANTUA-MAKING--A STRANGER ARRIVES IN THE VALLEY--HIS MYSTERIOUS
CONDUCT--NATIVE ORATORY--THE INTERVIEW--ITS RESULTS--DEPARTURE OF THE
STRANGER


Returning health and peace of mind gave a new interest to everything
around me. I sought to diversify my time by as many enjoyments as lay
within my reach. Bathing in company with troops of girls formed one of
my chief amusements. We sometimes enjoyed the recreation in the waters
of a miniature lake, to which the central stream of the valley expanded.
This lovely sheet of water was almost circular in figure, and about
three hundred yards across. Its beauty was indescribable. All around
its banks waved luxuriant masses of tropical foliage, soaring high above
which were seen, here and there, the symmetrical shaft of the cocoanut
tree, surmounted by its tufts of graceful branches, drooping in the air
like so many waving ostrich plumes.

The ease and grace with which the maidens of the valley propelled
themselves through the water, and their familiarity with the element,
were truly astonishing. Sometimes they might be seen gliding along just
under the surface, without apparently moving hand or foot--then throwing
themselves on their sides, they darted through the water, revealing
glimpses of their forms, as, in the course of their rapid progress, they
shot for an instant partly into the air--at one moment they dived deep
down into the water, and the next they rose bounding to the surface.

I remember upon one occasion plunging in among a parcel of these
river-nymphs, and counting vainly on my superior strength, sought to
drag some of them under the water, but I quickly repented my temerity.
The amphibious young creatures swarmed about me like a shoal of
dolphins, and seizing hold of my devoted limbs, tumbled me about and
ducked me under the surface, until from the strange noises which rang in
my ears, and the supernatural visions dancing before my eyes, I thought
I was in the land of the spirits. I stood indeed as little chance among
them as a cumbrous whale attacked on all sides by a legion of swordfish.
When at length they relinquished their hold of me, they swam away in
every direction, laughing at my clumsy endeavours to reach them.

There was no boat on the lake; but at my solicitation and for my special
use, some of the young men attached to Marheyo’s household, under
the direction of the indefatigable Kory-Kory, brought up a light and
tastefully carved canoe from the sea. It was launched upon the sheet
of water, and floated there as gracefully as a swan. But, melancholy to
relate, it produced an effect I had not anticipated. The sweet nymphs,
who had sported with me before on the lake, now all fled its vicinity.
The prohibited craft, guarded by the edicts of the ‘taboo,’ extended the
prohibition to the waters in which it lay.

For a few days, Kory-Kory, with one or two other youths, accompanied
me in my excursions to the lake, and while I paddled about in my light
canoe, would swim after me shouting and gambolling in pursuit. But I
as ever partial to what is termed in the ‘Young Men’s Own Book’--‘the
society of virtuous and intelligent young ladies;’ and in the absence
of the mermaids, the amusement became dull and insipid. One morning
I expressed to my faithful servitor my desire for the return of the
nymphs. The honest fellow looked at me bewildered for a moment, and
then shook his head solemnly, and murmured ‘taboo! taboo!’ giving me to
understand that unless the canoe was removed I could not expect to have
the young ladies back again. But to this procedure I was averse; I not
only wanted the canoe to stay where it was, but I wanted the beauteous
Fayaway to get into it, and paddle with me about the lake. This latter
proposition completely horrified Kory-Kory’s notions of propriety. He
inveighed against it, as something too monstrous to be thought of. It
not only shocked their established notions of propriety, but was at
variance with all their religious ordinances.

However, although the ‘taboo’ was a ticklish thing to meddle with, I
determined to test its capabilities of resisting an attack. I consulted
the chief Mehevi, who endeavoured to dissuade me from my object; but
I was not to be repulsed; and accordingly increased the warmth of my
solicitations. At last he entered into a long, and I have no doubt a
very learned and eloquent exposition of the history and nature of the
‘taboo’ as affecting this particular case; employing a variety of most
extraordinary words, which, from their amazing length and sonorousness,
I have every reason to believe were of a theological nature. But all
that he said failed to convince me: partly, perhaps, because I could not
comprehend a word that he uttered; but chiefly, that for the life of me
I could not understand why a woman would not have as much right to
enter a canoe as a man. At last he became a little more rational, and
intimated that, out of the abundant love he bore me, he would consult
with the priests and see what could be done.

How it was that the priesthood of Typee satisfied the affair with their
consciences, I know not; but so it was, and Fayaway dispensation from
this portion of the taboo was at length procured. Such an event I
believe never before had occurred in the valley; but it was high time
the islanders should be taught a little gallantry, and I trust that the
example I set them may produce beneficial effects. Ridiculous, indeed,
that the lovely creatures should be obliged to paddle about in the
water, like so many ducks, while a parcel of great strapping fellows
skimmed over its surface in their canoes.

The first day after Fayaway’s emancipation, I had a delightful little
party on the lake--the damsels’ Kory-Kory, and myself. My zealous
body-servant brought from the house a calabash of poee-poee, half a
dozen young cocoanuts--stripped of their husks--three pipes, as many
yams, and me on his back a part of the way. Something of a load; but
Kory-Kory was a very strong man for his size, and by no means brittle in
the spine. We had a very pleasant day; my trusty valet plied the paddle
and swept us gently along the margin of the water, beneath the shades
of the overhanging thickets. Fayaway and I reclined in the stern of
the canoe, on the very best terms possible with one another; the gentle
nymph occasionally placing her pipe to her lip, and exhaling the mild
fumes of the tobacco, to which her rosy breath added a fresh perfume.
Strange as it may seem, there is nothing in which a young and beautiful
female appears to more advantage than in the act of smoking. How
captivating is a Peruvian lady, swinging in her gaily-woven hammock of
grass, extended between two orange-trees, and inhaling the fragrance of
a choice cigarro!

But Fayaway, holding in her delicately formed olive hand the long yellow
reed of her pipe, with its quaintly carved bowl, and every few moments
languishingly giving forth light wreaths of vapour from her mouth and
nostrils, looked still more engaging.

We floated about thus for several hours, when I looked up to the warm,
glowing, tropical sky, and then down into the transparent depths below;
and when my eye, wandering from the bewitching scenery around, fell upon
the grotesquely-tattooed form of Kory-Kory, and finally, encountered the
pensive gaze of Fayaway, I thought I had been transported to some fairy
region, so unreal did everything appear.

This lovely piece of water was the coolest spot in all the valley, and I
now made it a place of continual resort during the hottest period of
the day. One side of it lay near the termination of a long gradually
expanding gorge, which mounted to the heights that environed the vale.
The strong trade wind, met in its course by these elevations, circled
and eddied about their summits, and was sometimes driven down the
steep ravine and swept across the valley, ruffling in its passage the
otherwise tranquil surface of the lake.

One day, after we had been paddling about for some time, I disembarked
Kory-Kory, and paddled the canoe to the windward side of the lake. As
I turned the canoe, Fayaway, who was with me, seemed all at once to be
struck with some happy idea. With a wild exclamation of delight, she
disengaged from her person the ample robe of tappa which was knotted
over her shoulder (for the purpose of shielding her from the sun), and
spreading it out like a sail, stood erect with upraised arms in the head
of the canoe. We American sailors pride ourselves upon our straight,
clean spars, but a prettier little mast than Fayaway made was never
shipped aboard of any craft.

In a moment the tappa was distended by the breeze--the long brown
tresses of Fayaway streamed in the air--and the canoe glided rapidly
through the water, and shot towards the shore. Seated in the stern, I
directed its course with my paddle until it dashed up the soft sloping
bank, and Fayaway, with a light spring alighted on the ground; whilst
Kory-Kory, who had watched our manoeuvres with admiration, now
clapped his hands in transport, and shouted like a madman. Many a time
afterwards was this feat repeated.

If the reader has not observed ere this that I was the declared admirer
of Miss Fayaway, all I can say is that he is little conversant with
affairs of the heart, and I certainly shall not trouble myself to
enlighten him any farther. Out of the calico I had brought from the ship
I made a dress for this lovely girl. In it she looked, I must confess,
something like an opera-dancer.

The drapery of the latter damsel generally commences a little above
the elbows, but my island beauty’s began at the waist, and terminated
sufficiently far above the ground to reveal the most bewitching ankle in
the universe.

The day that Fayaway first wore this robe was rendered memorable by a
new acquaintance being introduced to me. In the afternoon I was lying
in the house when I heard a great uproar outside; but being by this time
pretty well accustomed to the wild halloos which were almost continually
ringing through the valley, I paid little attention to it, until old
Marheyo, under the influence of some strange excitement, rushed into my
presence and communicated the astounding tidings, ‘Marnoo pemi!’ which
being interpreted, implied that an individual by the name of Marnoo was
approaching.

My worthy old friend evidently expected that this intelligence would
produce a great effect upon me, and for a time he stood earnestly
regarding me, as if curious to see how I should conduct myself, but as
I remained perfectly unmoved, the old gentleman darted out of the house
again, in as great a hurry as he had entered it.

‘Marnoo, Marnoo,’ cogitated I, ‘I have never heard that name before.
Some distinguished character, I presume, from the prodigious riot the
natives are making;’ the tumultuous noise drawing nearer and nearer
every moment, while ‘Marnoo!--Marnoo!’ was shouted by every tongue.

I made up my mind that some savage warrior of consequence, who had
not yet enjoyed the honour of an audience, was desirous of paying his
respects on the present occasion. So vain had I become by the lavish
attention to which I had been accustomed, that I felt half inclined,
as a punishment for such neglect, to give this Marnoo a cold reception,
when the excited throng came within view, convoying one of the most
striking specimens of humanity that I ever beheld.

The stranger could not have been more than twenty-five years of age, and
was a little above the ordinary height; had he a single hair’s breadth
taller, the matchless symmetry of his form would have been destroyed.
His unclad limbs were beautifully formed; whilst the elegant outline of
his figure, together with his beardless cheeks, might have entitled him
to the distinction of standing for the statue of the Polynesian Apollo;
and indeed the oval of his countenance and the regularity of every
feature reminded one of an antique bust. But the marble repose of art
was supplied by a warmth and liveliness of expression only to be seen in
the South Sea Islander under the most favourable developments of nature.
The hair of Marnoo was a rich curling brown, and twined about his
temples and neck in little close curling ringlets, which danced up and
down continually, when he was animated in conversation. His cheek was
of a feminine softness, and his face was free from the least blemish
of tattooing, although the rest of his body was drawn all over with
fanciful figures, which--unlike the unconnected sketching usual among
these natives--appeared to have been executed in conformity with some
general design.

The tattooing on his back in particular attracted my attention. The
artist employed must indeed have excelled in his profession. Traced
along the course of the spine was accurately delineated the slender,
tapering and diamond checkered shaft of the beautiful ‘artu’ tree.
Branching from the stem on each side, and disposed alternately, were
the graceful branches drooping with leaves all correctly drawn and
elaborately finished. Indeed the best specimen of the Fine Arts I had
yet seen in Typee. A rear view of the stranger might have suggested the
idea of a spreading vine tacked against a garden wall. Upon his breast,
arms and legs, were exhibited an infinite variety of figures; every
one of which, however, appeared to have reference to the general
effect sought to be produced. The tattooing I have described was of the
brightest blue, and when contrasted with the light olive-colour of the
skin, produced an unique and even elegant effect. A slight girdle of
white tappa, scarcely two inches in width, but hanging before and behind
in spreading tassels, composed the entire costume of the stranger.

He advanced surrounded by the islanders, carrying under one arm a small
roll of native cloth, and grasping in his other hand a long and richly
decorated spear. His manner was that of a traveller conscious that he is
approaching a comfortable stage in his journey. Every moment he turned
good-humouredly on the throng around him, and gave some dashing sort of
reply to their incessant queries, which appeared to convulse them with
uncontrollable mirth.

Struck by his demeanour, and the peculiarity of his appearance, so
unlike that of the shaven-crowned and face-tattooed natives in general,
I involuntarily rose as he entered the house, and proffered him a seat
on the mats beside me. But without deigning to notice the civility, or
even the more incontrovertible fact of my existence, the stranger passed
on, utterly regardless of me, and flung himself upon the further end
of the long couch that traversed the sole apartment of Marheyo’s
habitation.

Had the belle of the season, in the pride of her beauty and power, been
cut in a place of public resort by some supercilious exquisite, she
could not have felt greater indignation than I did at this unexpected
slight.

I was thrown into utter astonishment. The conduct of the savages had
prepared me to anticipate from every newcomer the same extravagant
expressions of curiosity and regard. The singularity of his conduct,
however, only roused my desire to discover who this remarkable personage
might be, who now engrossed the attention of every one.

Tinor placed before him a calabash of poee-poee, from which the stranger
regaled himself, alternating every mouthful with some rapid exclamation,
which was eagerly caught up and echoed by the crowd that completely
filled the house. When I observed the striking devotion of the natives
to him, and their temporary withdrawal of all attention from myself, I
felt not a little piqued. The glory of Tommo is departed, thought I, and
the sooner he removes from the valley the better. These were my feelings
at the moment, and they were prompted by that glorious principle
inherent in all heroic natures--the strong-rooted determination to have
the biggest share of the pudding or to go without any of it.

Marnoo, that all-attractive personage, having satisfied his hunger and
inhaled a few whiffs from a pipe which was handed to him, launched
out into an harangue which completely enchained the attention of his
auditors.

Little as I understood of the language, yet from his animated gestures
and the varying expression of his features--reflected as from so many
mirrors in the countenances around him, I could easily discover the
nature of those passions which he sought to arouse. From the frequent
recurrence of the words ‘Nukuheva’ and ‘Frannee’ (French), and some
others with the meaning of which I was acquainted, he appeared to be
rehearsing to his auditors events which had recently occurred in the
neighbouring bays. But how he had gained the knowledge of these matters
I could not understand, unless it were that he had just come from
Nukuheva--a supposition which his travel-stained appearance not a little
supported. But, if a native of that region, I could not account for his
friendly reception at the hands of the Typees.

Never, certainly, had I beheld so powerful an exhibition of natural
eloquence as Marnoo displayed during the course of his oration. The
grace of the attitudes into which he threw his flexible figure, the
striking gestures of his naked arms, and above all, the fire which shot
from his brilliant eyes, imparted an effect to the continually changing
accents of his voice, of which the most accomplished orator might have
been proud. At one moment reclining sideways upon the mat, and leaning
calmly upon his bended arm, he related circumstantially the aggressions
of the French--their hostile visits to the surrounding bays, enumerating
each one in succession--Happar, Puerka, Nukuheva, Tior,--and then
starting to his feet and precipitating himself forward with clenched
hands and a countenance distorted with passion, he poured out a tide of
invectives. Falling back into an attitude of lofty command, he exhorted
the Typees to resist these encroachments; reminding them, with a fierce
glance of exultation, that as yet the terror of their name had preserved
them from attack, and with a scornful sneer he sketched in ironical
terms the wondrous intrepidity of the French, who, with five war-canoes
and hundreds of men, had not dared to assail the naked warriors of their
valley.

The effect he produced upon his audience was electric; one and all they
stood regarding him with sparkling eyes and trembling limbs, as though
they were listening to the inspired voice of a prophet.

But it soon appeared that Marnoo’s powers were as versatile as they
were extraordinary. As soon as he had finished his vehement harangue, he
threw himself again upon the mats, and, singling out individuals in the
crowd, addressed them by name, in a sort of bantering style, the humour
of which, though nearly hidden from me filled the whole assembly with
uproarious delight.

He had a word for everybody; and, turning rapidly from one to another,
gave utterance to some hasty witticism, which was sure to be followed
by peals of laughter. To the females as well as to the men, he addressed
his discourse. Heaven only knows what he said to them, but he caused
smiles and blushes to mantle their ingenuous faces. I am, indeed, very
much inclined to believe that Marnoo, with his handsome person and
captivating manners, was a sad deceiver among the simple maidens of the
island.

During all this time he had never, for one moment, deigned to regard me.
He appeared, indeed, to be altogether unconscious of my presence. I
was utterly at a loss how to account for this extraordinary conduct. I
easily perceived that he was a man of no little consequence among the
islanders; that he possessed uncommon talents; and was gifted with a
higher degree of knowledge than the inmates of the valley. For these
reasons, I therefore greatly feared lest having, from some cause or
other, unfriendly feelings towards me, he might exert his powerful
influence to do me mischief.

It seemed evident that he was not a permanent resident of the vale, and
yet, whence could he have come? On all sides the Typees were girt in by
hostile tribes, and how could he possibly, if belonging to any of these,
be received with so much cordiality?

The personal appearance of the enigmatical stranger suggested additional
perplexities. The face, free from tattooing, and the unshaven crown,
were peculiarities I had never before remarked in any part of the
island, and I had always heard that the contrary were considered the
indispensable distinction of a Marquesan warrior. Altogether the matter
was perfectly incomprehensible to me, and I awaited its solution with no
small degree of anxiety.

At length, from certain indications, I suspected that he was making me
the subject of his remarks, although he appeared cautiously to avoid
either pronouncing my name, or looking in the direction where I lay. All
at once he rose from the mats where he had been reclining, and, still
conversing, moved towards me, his eye purposely evading mine, and seated
himself within less than a yard of me. I had hardly recovered from my
surprise, when he suddenly turned round, and, with a most benignant
countenance extended his right hand gracefully towards me. Of course I
accepted the courteous challenge, and, as soon as our palms met, he bent
towards me, and murmured in musical accents--‘How you do?’ ‘How long you
been in this bay?’ ‘You like this bay?’

Had I been pierced simultaneously by three Happar spears, I could not
have started more than I did at hearing these simple questions. For a
moment I was overwhelmed with astonishment, and then answered something
I know not what; but as soon as I regained my self-possession, the
thought darted through my mind that from this individual I might obtain
that information regarding Toby which I suspected the natives had
purposely withheld from me. Accordingly I questioned him concerning
the disappearance of my companion, but he denied all knowledge of
the matter. I then inquired from whence he had come? He replied, from
Nukuheva. When I expressed my surprise, he looked at me for a moment,
as if enjoying my perplexity, and then with his strange vivacity,
exclaimed,--‘Ah! Me taboo,--me go Nukuheva,--me go Tior,--me go
Typee,--me go everywhere,--nobody harm me,--me taboo.’

This explanation would have been altogether unintelligible to me, had
it not recalled to my mind something I had previously heard concerning
a singular custom among these islanders. Though the country is possessed
by various tribes, whose mutual hostilities almost wholly prelude any
intercourse between them; yet there are instances where a person having
ratified friendly relations with some individual belonging longing to
the valley, whose inmates are at war with his own, may, under particular
restrictions, venture with impunity into the country of his friend,
where, under other circumstances, he would have been treated as an
enemy. In this light are personal friendships regarded among them, and
the individual so protected is said to be ‘taboo’, and his person, to a
certain extent, is held as sacred. Thus the stranger informed me he had
access to all the valleys in the island.

Curious to know how he had acquired his knowledge of English, I
questioned him on the subject. At first, for some reason or other, he
evaded the inquiry, but afterwards told me that, when a boy, he had
been carried to sea by the captain of a trading vessel, with whom he
had stayed three years, living part of the time with him at Sidney in
Australia, and that at a subsequent visit to the island, the captain
had, at his own request, permitted him to remain among his countrymen.
The natural quickness of the savage had been wonderfully improved by his
intercourse with the white men, and his partial knowledge of a foreign
language gave him a great ascendancy over his less accomplished
countrymen.

When I asked the now affable Marnoo why it was that he had not
previously spoken to me, he eagerly inquired what I had been led to
think of him from his conduct in that respect. I replied, that I had
supposed him to be some great chief or warrior, who had seen plenty
of white men before, and did not think it worth while to notice a poor
sailor. At this declaration of the exalted opinion I had formed of him,
he appeared vastly gratified, and gave me to understand that he had
purposely behaved in that manner, in order to increase my astonishment,
as soon as he should see proper to address me.

Marnoo now sought to learn my version of the story as to how I came
to be an inmate of the Typee valley. When I related to him the
circumstances under which Toby and I had entered it, he listened
with evident interest; but as soon as I alluded to the absence, yet
unaccounted for, of my comrade, he endeavoured to change the subject, as
if it were something he desired not to agitate. It seemed, indeed, as
if everything connected with Toby was destined to beget distrust and
anxiety in my bosom. Notwithstanding Marnoo’s denial of any knowledge
of his fate, I could not avoid suspecting that he was deceiving me; and
this suspicion revived those frightful apprehensions with regard to my
own fate, which, for a short time past, had subsided in my breast.

Influenced by these feelings, I now felt a strong desire to avail myself
of the stranger’s protection, and under his safeguard to return to
Nukuheva. But as soon as I hinted at this, he unhesitatingly pronounced
it to be entirely impracticable; assuring me that the Typees would never
consent to my leaving the valley. Although what he said merely confirmed
the impression which I had before entertained, still it increased
my anxiety to escape from a captivity which, however endurable, nay,
delightful it might be in some respects, involved in its issues a fate
marked by the most frightful contingencies.

I could not conceal from my mind that Toby had been treated in the same
friendly manner as I had been, and yet all their kindness terminated
with his mysterious disappearance. Might not the same fate await me?--a
fate too dreadful to think of. Stimulated by these considerations,
I urged anew my request to Marnoo; but he only set forth in stronger
colours the impossibility of my escape, and repeated his previous
declaration that the Typees would never be brought to consent to my
departure.

When I endeavoured to learn from him the motives which prompted them to
hold me a prisoner, Marnoo again presumed that mysterious tone which had
tormented me with apprehension when I had questioned him with regard to
the fate of my companion.

Thus repulsed, in a manner which only served, by arousing the most
dreadful forebodings, to excite me to renewed attempts, I conjured him
to intercede for me with the natives, and endeavour to procure their
consent to my leaving them. To this he appeared strongly averse; but,
yielding at last to my importunities, he addressed several of the
chiefs, who with the rest had been eyeing us intently during the whole
of our conversation. His petition, however, was at once met with the
most violent disapprobation, manifesting itself in angry glances and
gestures, and a perfect torrent of passionate words, directed to both
him and myself. Marnoo, evidently repenting the step he had taken,
earnestly deprecated the resentment of the crowd, and, in a few moments
succeeded in pacifying to some extent the clamours which had broken out
as soon as his proposition had been understood.

With the most intense interest had I watched the reception his
intercession might receive; and a bitter pang shot through my heart
at the additional evidence, now furnished, of the unchangeable
determination of the islanders. Marnoo told me with evident alarm in his
countenance, that although admitted into the bay on a friendly footing
with its inhabitants, he could not presume to meddle with their
concerns, as such procedure, if persisted in, would at once absolve
the Typees from the restraints of the ‘taboo’, although so long as
he refrained from such conduct, it screened him effectually from the
consequences of the enmity they bore his tribe. At this moment, Mehevi,
who was present, angrily interrupted him; and the words which he uttered
in a commanding tone, evidently meant that he must at once cease talking
to me and withdraw to the other part of the house. Marnoo immediately
started up, hurriedly enjoining me not to address him again, and as I
valued my safety, to refrain from all further allusion to the subject of
my departure; and then, in compliance with the order of the determined
chief, but not before it had again been angrily repeated, he withdrew to
a distance.

I now perceived, with no small degree of apprehension, the same savage
expression in the countenances of the natives, which had startled me
during the scene at the Ti. They glanced their eyes suspiciously from
Marnoo to me, as if distrusting the nature of an intercourse carried on,
as it was, in a language they could not understand, and they seemed to
harbour the belief that already we had concerted measures calculated to
elude their vigilance.

The lively countenances of these people are wonderfully indicative of
the emotions of the soul, and the imperfections of their oral language
are more than compensated for by the nervous eloquence of their looks
and gestures. I could plainly trace, in every varying expression of
their faces, all those passions which had been thus unexpectedly aroused
in their bosoms.

It required no reflection to convince me, from what was going on, that
the injunction of Marnoo was not to be rashly slighted; and accordingly,
great as was the effort to suppress my feelings, I accosted Mehevi in
a good-humoured tone, with a view of dissipating any ill impression
he might have received. But the ireful, angry chief was not so easily
mollified. He rejected my advances with that peculiarly stern expression
I have before described, and took care by the whole of his behaviour
towards me to show the displeasure and resentment which he felt.

Marnoo, at the other extremity of the house, apparently desirous of
making a diversion in my favour, exerted himself to amuse with his
pleasantries the crowd about him; but his lively attempts were not so
successful as they had previously been, and, foiled in his efforts, he
rose gravely to depart. No one expressed any regret at this movement,
so seizing his roll of tappa, and grasping his spear, he advanced to
the front of the pi-pi, and waving his hand in adieu to the now silent
throng, cast upon me a glance of mingled pity and reproach, and flung
himself into the path which led from the house. I watched his receding
figure until it was lost in the obscurity of the grove, and then gave
myself up to the most desponding reflections.




CHAPTER NINETEEN

REFLECTIONS AFTER MARNOO’S DEPARTURE-BATTLE OF THE POP-GUNS--STRANGE
CONCEIT OF MARHEYO--PROCESS OF MAKING TAPPA


The knowledge I had now obtained as to the intention of the savages
deeply affected me.

Marnoo, I perceived, was a man who, by reason of his superior
acquirements, and the knowledge he possessed of the events which were
taking place in the different bays of the island, was held in no little
estimation by the inhabitants of the valley. He had been received with
the most cordial welcome and respect. The natives had hung upon the
accents of his voice, and, had manifested the highest gratification at
being individually noticed by him. And yet despite all this, a few
words urged in my behalf, with the intent of obtaining my release from
captivity, had sufficed not only to banish all harmony and good-will;
but, if I could believe what he told me, had gone on to endanger his own
personal safety.

How strongly rooted, then, must be the determination of the Typees
with regard to me, and how suddenly could they display the strangest
passions! The mere suggestion of my departure had estranged from me,
for the time at least, Mehevi, who was the most influential of all
the chiefs, and who had previously exhibited so many instances of his
friendly sentiments. The rest of the natives had likewise evinced their
strong repugnance to my wishes, and even Kory-Kory himself seemed to
share in the general disapprobation bestowed upon me.

In vain I racked my invention to find out some motive for them, but I
could discover none.

But however this might be, the scene which had just occurred admonished
me of the danger of trifling with the wayward and passionate spirits
against whom it was vain to struggle, and might even be fatal to do go.
My only hope was to induce the natives to believe that I was reconciled
to my detention in the valley, and by assuming a tranquil and cheerful
demeanour, to allay the suspicions which I had so unfortunately aroused.
Their confidence revived, they might in a short time remit in some
degree their watchfulness over my movements, and I should then be the
better enabled to avail myself of any opportunity which presented itself
for escape. I determined, therefore, to make the best of a bad
bargain, and to bear up manfully against whatever might betide. In this
endeavour, I succeeded beyond my own expectations. At the period
of Marnoo’s visit, I had been in the valley, as nearly as I could
conjecture, some two months. Although not completely recovered from my
strange illness, which still lingered about me, I was free from pain
and able to take exercise. In short, I had every reason to anticipate a
perfect recovery. Freed from apprehension on this point, and resolved
to regard the future without flinching, I flung myself anew into all the
social pleasures of the valley, and sought to bury all regrets, and
all remembrances of my previous existence in the wild enjoyments it
afforded.

In my various wanderings through the vale, and as I became better
acquainted with the character of its inhabitants, I was more and more
struck with the light-hearted joyousness that everywhere prevailed. The
minds of these simple savages, unoccupied by matters of graver moment,
were capable of deriving the utmost delight from circumstances which
would have passed unnoticed in more intelligent communities. All their
enjoyment, indeed, seemed to be made up of the little trifling incidents
of the passing hour; but these diminutive items swelled altogether to an
amount of happiness seldom experienced by more enlightened individuals,
whose pleasures are drawn from more elevated but rarer sources.

What community, for instance, of refined and intellectual mortals
would derive the least satisfaction from shooting pop-guns? The
mere supposition of such a thing being possible would excite their
indignation, and yet the whole population of Typee did little else for
ten days but occupy themselves with that childish amusement, fairly
screaming, too, with the delight it afforded them.

One day I was frolicking with a little spirited urchin, some six years
old, who chased me with a piece of bamboo about three feet long, with
which he occasionally belaboured me. Seizing the stick from him, the
idea happened to suggest itself, that I might make for the youngster,
out of the slender tube, one of those nursery muskets with which I had
sometimes seen children playing.

Accordingly, with my knife I made two parallel slits in the cane several
inches in length, and cutting loose at one end the elastic strip between
them, bent it back and slipped the point into a little notch made for
the purse. Any small substance placed against this would be projected
with considerable force through the tube, by merely springing the bent
strip out of the notch.

Had I possessed the remotest idea of the sensation this piece of
ordnance was destined to produce, I should certainly have taken out a
patent for the invention. The boy scampered away with it, half delirious
with ecstasy, and in twenty minutes afterwards I might have been seen
surrounded by a noisy crowd--venerable old graybeards--responsible
fathers of families--valiant warriors--matrons--young men--girls and
children, all holding in their hands bits of bamboo, and each clamouring
to be served first.

For three or four hours I was engaged in manufacturing pop-guns, but
at last made over my good-will and interest in the concern to a lad of
remarkably quick parts, whom I soon initiated into the art and mystery.

Pop, Pop, Pop, Pop, now resounded all over the valley. Duels,
skirmishes, pitched battles, and general engagements were to be seen
on every side. Here, as you walked along a path which led through a
thicket, you fell into a cunningly laid ambush, and became a target for
a body of musketeers whose tattooed limbs you could just see peeping
into view through the foliage. There you were assailed by the intrepid
garrison of a house, who levelled their bamboo rifles at you from
between the upright canes which composed its sides. Farther on you were
fired upon by a detachment of sharpshooters, mounted upon the top of a
pi-pi.

Pop, Pop, Pop, Pop! green guavas, seeds, and berries were flying about
in every direction, and during this dangerous state of affairs I was
half afraid that, like the man and his brazen bull, I should fall
a victim to my own ingenuity. Like everything else, however, the
excitement gradually wore away, though ever after occasionally pop-guns
might be heard at all hours of the day.

It was towards the close of the pop-gun war, that I was infinitely
diverted with a strange freak of Marheyo’s.

I had worn, when I quitted the ship, a pair of thick pumps, which, from
the rough usage they had received in scaling precipices and sliding down
gorges, were so dilapidated as to be altogether unfit for use--so, at
least, would have thought the generality of people, and so they most
certainly were, when considered in the light of shoes. But things
unservicable in one way, may with advantage be applied in another,
that is, if one have genius enough for the purpose. This genius Marheyo
possessed in a superlative degree, as he abundantly evinced by the use
to which he put those sorely bruised and battered old shoes.

Every article, however trivial, which belonged to me, the natives
appeared to regard as sacred; and I observed that for several days
after becoming an inmate of the house, my pumps were suffered to remain,
untouched, where I had first happened to throw them. I remembered,
however, that after awhile I had missed them from their accustomed
place; but the matter gave me no concern, supposing that Tinor--like any
other tidy housewife, having come across them in some of her domestic
occupations--had pitched the useless things out of the house. But I was
soon undeceived.

One day I observed old Marheyo bustling about me with unusual activity,
and to such a degree as almost to supersede Kory-Kory in the functions
of his office. One moment he volunteered to trot off with me on his back
to the stream; and when I refused, noways daunted by the repulse, he
continued to frisk about me like a superannuated house-dog. I could not
for the life of me conjecture what possessed the old gentleman, until
all at once, availing himself of the temporary absence of the household,
he went through a variety of of uncouth gestures, pointing eagerly down
to my feet, then up to a little bundle, which swung from the ridge pole
overhead. At last I caught a faint idea of his meaning, and motioned him
to lower the package. He executed the order in the twinkling of an eye,
and unrolling a piece of tappa, displayed to my astonished gaze the
identical pumps which I thought had been destroyed long before.

I immediately comprehended his desire, and very generously gave him the
shoes, which had become quite mouldy, wondering for what earthly purpose
he could want them. The same afternoon I descried the venerable warrior
approaching the house, with a slow, stately gait, ear-rings in ears, and
spear in hand, with this highly ornamental pair of shoes suspended from
his neck by a strip of bark, and swinging backwards and forwards on
his capacious chest. In the gala costume of the tasteful Marheyo, these
calf-skin pendants ever after formed the most striking feature.

But to turn to something a little more important. Although the whole
existence of the inhabitants of the valley seemed to pass away exempt
from toil, yet there were some light employments which, although amusing
rather than laborious as occupations, contributed to their comfort and
luxury. Among these the most important was the manufacture of the native
cloth,--‘tappa’,--so well known, under various modifications, throughout
the whole Polynesian Archipelago. As is generally understood, this
useful and sometimes elegant article is fabricated from the bark
of different trees. But, as I believe that no description of its
manufacture has ever been given, I shall state what I know regarding it.

In the manufacture of the beautiful white tappa generally worn on the
Marquesan Islands, the preliminary operation consists in gathering a
certain quantity of the young branches of the cloth-tree. The exterior
green bark being pulled off as worthless, there remains a slender
fibrous substance, which is carefully stripped from the stick, to which
it closely adheres. When a sufficient quantity of it has been collected,
the various strips are enveloped in a covering of large leaves, which
the natives use precisely as we do wrapping-paper, and which are secured
by a few turns of a line passed round them. The package is then laid in
the bed of some running stream, with a heavy stone placed over it, to
prevent its being swept away. After it has remained for two or three
days in this state, it is drawn out, and exposed, for a short time, to
the action of the air, every distinct piece being attentively inspected,
with a view of ascertaining whether it has yet been sufficiently
affected by the operation. This is repeated again and again, until the
desired result is obtained.

When the substance is in a proper state for the next process, it
betrays evidences of incipient decomposition; the fibres are relaxed and
softened, and rendered perfectly malleable. The different strips are
now extended, one by one, in successive layers, upon some smooth
surface--generally the prostrate trunk of a cocoanut tree--and the heap
thus formed is subjected, at every new increase, to a moderate beating,
with a sort of wooden mallet, leisurely applied. The mallet is made of a
hard heavy wood resembling ebony, is about twelve inches in length, and
perhaps two in breadth, with a rounded handle at one end, and in shape
is the exact counterpart of one of our four-sided razor-strops. The flat
surfaces of the implement are marked with shallow parallel indentations,
varying in depth on the different sides, so as to be adapted to the
several stages of the operation. These marks produce the corduroy sort
of stripes discernible in the tappa in its finished state. After being
beaten in the manner I have described, the material soon becomes blended
in one mass, which, moistened occasionally with water, is at intervals
hammered out, by a kind of gold-beating process, to any degree of
thinness required. In this way the cloth is easily made to vary in
strength and thickness, so as to suit the numerous purposes to which it
is applied.

When the operation last described has been concluded, the new-made tappa
is spread out on the grass to bleach and dry, and soon becomes of a
dazzling whiteness. Sometimes, in the first stages of the manufacture,
the substance is impregnated with a vegetable juice, which gives it
a permanent colour. A rich brown and a bright yellow are occasionally
seen, but the simple taste of the Typee people inclines them to prefer
the natural tint.

The notable wife of Kamehameha, the renowned conqueror and king of the
Sandwich Islands, used to pride herself in the skill she displayed in
dyeing her tappa with contrasting colours disposed in regular figures;
and, in the midst of the innovations of the times, was regarded, towards
the decline of her life, as a lady of the old school, clinging as she
did to the national cloth, in preference to the frippery of the
European calicoes. But the art of printing the tappa is unknown upon the
Marquesan Islands. In passing along the valley, I was often attracted by
the noise of the mallet, which, when employed in the manufacture of
the cloth produces at every stroke of its hard, heavy wood, a clear,
ringing, and musical sound, capable of being heard at a great distance.
When several of these implements happen to be in operation at the same
time, near one another, the effect upon the ear of a person, at a little
distance, is really charming.




CHAPTER TWENTY

HISTORY OF A DAY AS USUALLY SPENT IN TYPEE VALLEY--DANCES OF THE
MARQUESAN GIRLS


Nothing can be more uniform and undiversified than the life of the
Typees; one tranquil day of ease and happiness follows another in quiet
succession; and with these unsophisicated savages the history of a
day is the history of a life. I will, therefore, as briefly as I can,
describe one of our days in the valley.

To begin with the morning. We were not very early risers--the sun would
be shooting his golden spikes above the Happar mountain, ere I threw
aside my tappa robe, and girding my long tunic about my waist, sallied
out with Fayaway and Kory-Kory, and the rest of the household, and bent
my steps towards the stream. Here we found congregated all those who
dwelt in our section of the valley; and here we bathed with them. The
fresh morning air and the cool flowing waters put both soul and body in
a glow, and after a half-hour employed in this recreation, we sauntered
back to the house--Tinor and Marheyo gathering dry sticks by the way
for fire-wood; some of the young men laying the cocoanut trees under
contribution as they passed beneath them; while Kory-Kory played his
outlandish pranks for my particular diversion, and Fayaway and I, not
arm in arm to be sure, but sometimes hand in hand, strolled along, with
feelings of perfect charity for all the world, and especial good-will
towards each other.

Our morning meal was soon prepared. The islanders are somewhat
abstemious at this repast; reserving the more powerful efforts of
their appetite to a later period of the day. For my own part, with the
assistance of my valet, who, as I have before stated, always officiated
as spoon on these occasions, I ate sparingly from one of Tinor’s
trenchers, of poee-poee; which was devoted exclusively for my own use,
being mixed with the milky meat of ripe cocoanut. A section of a roasted
bread-fruit, a small cake of ‘Amar’, or a mess of ‘Cokoo,’ two or three
bananas, or a mammee-apple; an annuee, or some other agreeable and
nutritious fruit served from day to day to diversify the meal, which was
finished by tossing off the liquid contents of a young cocoanut or two.

While partaking of this simple repast, the inmates of Marheyo’s house,
after the style of the ancient Romans, reclined in sociable groups upon
the divan of mats, and digestion was promoted by cheerful conversation.

After the morning meal was concluded, pipes were lighted; and among them
my own especial pipe, a present from the noble Mehevi.

The islanders, who only smoke a whiff or two at a time, and at long
intervals, and who keep their pipes going from hand to hand continually,
regarded my systematic smoking of four or five pipefuls of tobacco in
succession, as something quite wonderful. When two or three pipes had
circulated freely, the company gradually broke up. Marheyo went to the
little hut he was forever building. Tinor began to inspect her rolls of
tappa, or employed her busy fingers in plaiting grass-mats. The girls
anointed themselves with their fragrant oils, dressed their hair, or
looked over their curious finery, and compared together their ivory
trinkets, fashioned out of boar’s tusks or whale’s teeth. The young men
and warriors produced their spears, paddles, canoe-gear, battle-clubs,
and war-conchs, and occupied themselves in carving, all sorts of figures
upon them with pointed bits of shell or flint, and adorning them,
especially the war-conchs, with tassels of braided bark and tufts of
human hair. Some, immediately after eating, threw themselves once more
upon the inviting mats, and resumed the employment of the previous
night, sleeping as soundly as if they had not closed their eyes for a
week. Others sallied out into the groves, for the purpose of gathering
fruit or fibres of bark and leaves; the last two being in constant
requisition, and applied to a hundred uses. A few, perhaps, among the
girls, would slip into the woods after flowers, or repair to the stream
will; small calabashes and cocoanut shells, in order to polish them
by friction with a smooth stone in the water. In truth these innocent
people seemed to be at no loss for something to occupy their time; and
it would be no light task to enumerate all their employments, or rather
pleasures.

My own mornings I spent in a variety of ways. Sometimes I rambled about
from house to house, sure of receiving a cordial welcome wherever I
went; or from grove to grove, and from one shady place to another, in
company with Kory-Kory and Fayaway, and a rabble rout of merry young
idlers. Sometimes I was too indolent for exercise, and accepting one of
the many invitations I was continually receiving, stretched myself out
on the mats of some hospitable dwelling, and occupied myself pleasantly
either in watching the proceedings of those around me or taking part
in them myself. Whenever I chose to do the latter, the delight of the
islanders was boundless; and there was always a throng of competitors
for the honour of instructing me in any particular craft. I soon became
quite an accomplished hand at making tappa--could braid a grass sling as
well as the best of them--and once, with my knife, carved the handle of
a javelin so exquisitely, that I have no doubt, to this day, Karnoonoo,
its owner, preserves it as a surprising specimen of my skill. As noon
approached, all those who had wandered forth from our habitation, began
to return; and when midday was fairly come scarcely a sound was to be
heard in the valley: a deep sleep fell upon all. The luxurious siesta
was hardly ever omitted, except by old Marheyo, who was so eccentric
a character, that he seemed to be governed by no fixed principles
whatever; but acting just according to the humour of the moment,
slept, ate, or tinkered away at his little hut, without regard to the
proprieties of time or place. Frequently he might have been seen taking
a nap in the sun at noon-day, or a bath in the stream of mid-night.
Once I beheld him perched eighty feet from the ground, in the tuft of a
cocoanut tree, smoking; and often I saw him standing up to the waist
in water, engaged in plucking out the stray hairs of his beard, using a
piece of muscle-shell for tweezers.

The noon-tide slumber lasted generally an hour and a half: very often
longer; and after the sleepers had arisen from their mats they again
had recourse to their pipes, and then made preparations for the most
important meal of the day.

I, however, like those gentlemen of leisure who breakfast at home and
dine at their club, almost invariably, during my intervals of health,
enjoyed the afternoon repast with the bachelor chiefs of the Ti, who
were always rejoiced to see me, and lavishly spread before me all the
good things which their larder afforded. Mehevi generally introduced
among other dainties a baked pig, an article which I have every reason
to suppose was provided for my sole gratification.

The Ti was a right jovial place. It did my heart, as well as my body,
good to visit it. Secure from female intrusion, there was no restraint
upon the hilarity of the warriors, who, like the gentlemen of Europe
after the cloth is drawn and the ladies retire, freely indulged their
mirth.

After spending a considerable portion of the afternoon at the Ti, I
usually found myself, as the cool of the evening came on, either sailing
on the little lake with Fayaway, or bathing in the waters of the
stream with a number of the savages, who, at this hour, always repaired
thither. As the shadows of night approached Marheyo’s household were
once more assembled under his roof: tapers were lit, long curious chants
were raised, interminable stories were told (for which one present was
little the wiser), and all sorts of social festivities served to while
away the time.

The young girls very often danced by moonlight in front of their
dwellings. There are a great variety of these dances, in which, however,
I never saw the men take part. They all consist of active, romping,
mischievous evolutions, in which every limb is brought into requisition.
Indeed, the Marquesan girls dance all over, as it were; not only do
their feet dance, but their arms, hands, fingers, ay, their very eyes,
seem to dance in their heads.

The damsels wear nothing but flowers and their compendious gala tunics;
and when they plume themselves for the dance, they look like a band of
olive-coloured Sylphides on the point of taking wing. In good sooth,
they so sway their floating forms, arch their necks, toss aloft their
naked arms, and glide, and swim, and whirl, that it was almost too much
for a quiet, sober-minded, modest young man like myself.

Unless some particular festivity was going forward, the inmates of
Marheyo’s house retired to their mats rather early in the evening; but
not for the night, since, after slumbering lightly for a while, they
rose again, relit their tapers, partook of the third and last meal of
the day, at which poee-poee alone was eaten, and then, after inhaling a
narcotic whiff from a pipe of tobacco, disposed themselves for the great
business of night, sleep. With the Marquesans it might almost most be
styled the great business of life, for they pass a large portion
of their time in the arms of Somnus. The native strength of their
constitution is no way shown more emphatically than in the quantity of
sleep they can endure. To many of them, indeed, life is little else than
an often interrupted and luxurious nap.




CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

THE SPRING OF ARVA WAI--REMARKABLE MONUMENTAL REMAINS--SOME IDEAS WITH
REGARD TO THE HISTORY OF THE PI-PIS FOUND IN THE VALLEY


Almost every country has its medicinal springs famed for their healing
virtues. The Cheltenham of Typee is embosomed in the deepest solitude,
and but seldom receives a visitor. It is situated remote from any
dwelling, a little way up the mountain, near the head of the valley; and
you approach it by a pathway shaded by the most beautiful foliage, and
adorned with a thousand fragrant plants.

The mineral waters of Arva Wai* ooze forth from the crevices of a rock,
and gliding down its mossy side, fall at last, in many clustering
drops, into a natural basin of stone fringed round with grass and
dewy-looking little violet-coloured flowers, as fresh and beautiful as
the perpetual moisture they enjoy can make them.


*I presume this might be translated into ‘Strong Waters’. Arva is the
name bestowed upon a root the properties of which are both inebriating
and medicinal. ‘Wai’ is the Marquesan word for water.


The water is held in high estimation by the islanders, some of whom
consider it an agreeable as well as a medicinal beverage; they bring it
from the mountain in their calabashes, and store it away beneath heaps
of leaves in some shady nook near the house. Old Marheyo had a great
love for the waters of the spring. Every now and then he lugged off to
the mountain a great round demijohn of a calabash, and, panting with his
exertions, brought it back filled with his darling fluid.

The water tasted like a solution of a dozen disagreeable things, and was
sufficiently nauseous to have made the fortune of the proprietor, had
the spa been situated in the midst of any civilized community.

As I am no chemist, I cannot give a scientific analysis of the water.
All I know about the matter is, that one day Marheyo in my presence
poured out the last drop from his huge calabash, and I observed at the
bottom of the vessel a small quantity of gravelly sediment very much
resembling our common sand. Whether this is always found in the water,
and gives it its peculiar flavour and virtues, or whether its presence
was merely incidental, I was not able to ascertain.

One day in returning from this spring by a circuitous path, I came upon
a scene which reminded me of Stonehenge and the architectural labours of
the Druids.

At the base of one of the mountains, and surrounded on all sides by
dense groves, a series of vast terraces of stone rises, step by step,
for a considerable distance up the hill side. These terraces cannot
be less than one hundred yards in length and twenty in width. Their
magnitude, however, is less striking than the immense size of the blocks
composing them. Some of the stones, of an oblong shape, are from ten
to fifteen feet in length, and five or six feet thick. Their sides are
quite smooth, but though square, and of pretty regular formation, they
bear no mark of the chisel. They are laid together without cement, and
here and there show gaps between. The topmost terrace and the lower
one are somewhat peculiar in their construction. They have both a
quadrangular depression in the centre, leaving the rest of the terrace
elevated several feet above it. In the intervals of the stones immense
trees have taken root, and their broad boughs stretching far over, and
interlacing together, support a canopy almost impenetrable to the sun.
Overgrowing the greater part of them, and climbing from one to another,
is a wilderness of vines, in whose sinewy embrace many of the stones
lie half-hidden, while in some places a thick growth of bushes entirely
covers them. There is a wild pathway which obliquely crosses two of
these terraces; and so profound is the shade, so dense the vegetation,
that a stranger to the place might pass along it without being aware of
their existence.

These structures bear every indication of a very high antiquity and
Kory-Kory, who was my authority in all matters of scientific research,
gave me to understand that they were coeval with the creation of the
world; that the great gods themselves were the builders; and that they
would endure until time shall be no more.

Kory-Kory’s prompt explanation and his attributing the work to a
divine origin, at once convinced me that neither he nor the rest of his
country-men knew anything about them.

As I gazed upon this monument, doubtless the work of an extinct and
forgotten race, thus buried in the green nook of an island at the ends
of the earth, the existence of which was yesterday unknown, a stronger
feeling of awe came over me than if I had stood musing at the mighty
base of the Pyramid of Cheops. There are no inscriptions, no sculpture,
no clue, by which to conjecture its history; nothing but the dumb
stones. How many generations of the majestic trees which overshadow them
have grown and flourished and decayed since first they were erected!

These remains naturally suggest many interesting reflections. They
establish the great age of the island, an opinion which the builders
of theories concerning, the creation of the various groups in the South
Seas are not always inclined to admit. For my own part, I think it
just as probable that human beings were living in the valleys of the
Marquesas three thousand years ago as that they were inhabiting the land
of Egypt. The origin of the island of Nukuheva cannot be imputed to the
coral insect; for indefatigable as that wonderful creature is, it would
be hardly muscular enough to pile rocks one upon the other more than
three thousand feet above the level of the sea. That the land may have
been thrown up by a submarine volcano is as possible as anything else.
No one can make an affidavit to the contrary, and therefore I still say
nothing against the supposition: indeed, were geologists to assert that
the whole continent of America had in like manner been formed by the
simultaneous explosion of a train of Etnas laid under the water all the
way from the North Pole to the parallel of Cape Horn, I am the last man
in the world to contradict them.

I have already mentioned that the dwellings of the islanders were almost
invariably built upon massive stone foundations, which they call pi-pis.
The dimensions of these, however, as well as of the stones composing
them, are comparatively small: but there are other and larger erections
of a similar description comprising the ‘morais’, or burying grounds,
and festival-places, in nearly all the valleys of the island. Some of
these piles are so extensive, and so great a degree of labour and skill
must have been requisite in constructing them, that I can scarcely
believe they were built by the ancestors of the present inhabitants. If
indeed they were, the race has sadly deteriorated in their knowledge of
the mechanic arts. To say nothing of their habitual indolence, by what
contrivance within the reach of so simple a people could such enormous
masses have been moved or fixed in their places? and how could they with
their rude implements have chiselled and hammered them into shape?

All of these larger pi-pis--like that of the Hoolah Hoolah ground in the
Typee valley--bore incontestible marks of great age; and I am disposed
to believe that their erection may be ascribed to the same race of men
who were the builders of the still more ancient remains I have just
described.

According to Kory-Kory’s account, the pi-pi upon which stands the Hoolah
Hoolah ground was built a great many moons ago, under the direction of
Monoo, a great chief and warrior, and, as it would appear, master-mason
among the Typees. It was erected for the express purpose to which it is
at present devoted, in the incredibly short period of one sun; and was
dedicated to the immortal wooden idols by a grand festival, which lasted
ten days and nights.

Among the smaller pi-pis, upon which stand the dwelling-houses of the
natives, I never observed any which intimated a recent erection. There
are in every part of the valley a great many of these massive stone
foundations which have no houses upon them. This is vastly convenient,
for whenever an enterprising islander chooses to emigrate a few hundred
yards from the place where he was born, all he has to do in order to
establish himself in some new locality, is to select one of the many
unappropriated pi-pis, and without further ceremony pitch his bamboo
tent upon it.




CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

PREPARATIONS FOR A GRAND FESTIVAL IN THE VALLEY--STRANGE DOINGS IN
THE TABOO GROVES--MONUMENT OF CALABASHES--GALA COSTUME OF THE TYPEE
DAMSELS--DEPARTURE FOR THE FESTIVAL


From the time that my lameness had decreased I had made a daily practice
of visiting Mehevi at the Ti, who invariably gave me a most cordial
reception. I was always accompanied in these excursions by Fayaway
and the ever-present Kory-Kory. The former, as soon as we reached the
vicinity of the Ti--which was rigorously tabooed to the whole female
sex--withdrew to a neighbouring hut, as if her feminine delicacy
‘restricted’ her from approaching a habitation which might be regarded
as a sort of Bachelor’s Hall.

And in good truth it might well have been so considered. Although it
was the permanent residence of several distinguished chiefs, and of
the noble Mehevi in particular, it was still at certain seasons the
favourite haunt of all the jolly, talkative, and elderly savages of
the vale, who resorted thither in the same way that similar characters
frequent a tavern in civilized countries. There they would remain hour
after hour, chatting, smoking, eating poee-poee, or busily engaged in
sleeping for the good of their constitutions.

This building appeared to be the head-quarters of the valley, where all
flying rumours concentrated; and to have seen it filled with a crowd
of the natives, all males, conversing in animated clusters, while
multitudes were continually coming and going, one would have thought it
a kind of savage Exchange, where the rise and fall of Polynesian Stock
was discussed.

Mehevi acted as supreme lord over the place, spending the greater
portion of his time there: and often when, at particular hours of the
day, it was deserted by nearly every one else except the verd-antique
looking centenarians, who were fixtures in the building, the chief
himself was sure to be found enjoying his ‘otium cum dignitate’--upon
the luxurious mats which covered the floor. Whenever I made my
appearance he invariably rose, and like a gentleman doing the honours of
his mansion, invited me to repose myself wherever I pleased, and calling
out ‘tamaree!’ (boy), a little fellow would appear, and then retiring
for an instant, return with some savoury mess, from which the chief
would press me to regale myself. To tell the truth, Mehevi was indebted
to the excellence of his viands for the honour of my repeated visits--a
matter which cannot appear singular, when it is borne in mind that
bachelors, all the world over, are famous for serving up unexceptionable
repasts.

One day, on drawing near to the Ti, I observed that extensive
preparations were going forward, plainly betokening some approaching
festival. Some of the symptoms reminded me of the stir produced among
the scullions of a large hotel, where a grand jubilee dinner is about to
be given. The natives were hurrying about hither and thither, engaged in
various duties, some lugging off to the stream enormous hollow
bamboos, for the purpose of filling them with water; others chasing
furious-looking hogs through the bushes, in their endeavours to capture
them; and numbers employed in kneading great mountains of poee-poee
heaped up in huge wooden vessels.

After observing these lively indications for a while, I was attracted to
a neighbouring grove by a prodigious squeaking which I heard there. On
reaching the spot I found it proceeded from a large hog which a number
of natives were forcibly holding to the earth, while a muscular fellow,
armed with a bludgeon, was ineffectually aiming murderous blows at the
skull of the unfortunate porker. Again and again he missed his
writhing and struggling victim, but though puffing and panting with
his exertions, he still continued them; and after striking a sufficient
number of blows to have demolished an entire drove of oxen, with one
crashing stroke he laid him dead at his feet.

Without letting any blood from the body, it was immediately carried to a
fire which had been kindled near at hand and four savages taking hold of
the carcass by its legs, passed it rapidly to and fro in the flames.
In a moment the smell of burning bristles betrayed the object of this
procedure. Having got thus far in the matter, the body was removed to a
little distance and, being disembowelled, the entrails were laid aside
as choice parts, and the whole carcass thoroughly washed with water. An
ample thick green cloth, composed of the long thick leaves of a species
of palm-tree, ingeniously tacked together with little pins of bamboo,
was now spread upon the ground, in which the body being carefully
rolled, it was borne to an oven previously prepared to receive it. Here
it was at once laid upon the heated stones at the bottom, and covered
with thick layers of leaves, the whole being quickly hidden from sight
by a mound of earth raised over it.

Such is the summary style in which the Typees convert perverse-minded
and rebellious hogs into the most docile and amiable pork; a morsel
of which placed on the tongue melts like a soft smile from the lips of
Beauty.

I commend their peculiar mode of proceeding to the consideration of all
butchers, cooks, and housewives. The hapless porker whose fate I have
just rehearsed, was not the only one who suffered in that memorable day.
Many a dismal grunt, many an imploring squeak, proclaimed what was going
on throughout the whole extent of the valley; and I verily believe the
first-born of every litter perished before the setting of that fatal
sun.

The scene around the Ti was now most animated. Hogs and poee-poee were
baking in numerous ovens, which, heaped up with fresh earth into slight
elevations, looked like so many ant-hills. Scores of the savages were
vigorously plying their stone pestles in preparing masses of poee-poee,
and numbers were gathering green bread-fruit and young cocoanuts in the
surrounding groves; when an exceeding great multitude, with a view of
encouraging the rest in their labours, stood still, and kept shouting
most lustily without intermission.

It is a peculiarity among these people, that, when engaged in an
employment, they always make a prodigious fuss about it. So seldom do
they ever exert themselves, that when they do work they seem determined
that so meritorious an action shall not escape the observation of those
around if, for example, they have occasion to remove a stone to a little
distance, which perhaps might be carried by two able-bodied men, a whole
swarm gather about it, and, after a vast deal of palavering, lift it
up among them, every one struggling to get hold of it, and bear it off
yelling and panting as if accomplishing some mighty achievement. Seeing
them on these occasions, one is reminded of an infinity of black ants
clustering about and dragging away to some hole the leg of a deceased
fly.

Having for some time attentively observed these demonstrations of good
cheer, I entered the Ti, where Mehevi sat complacently looking out upon
the busy scene, and occasionally issuing his orders. The chief appeared
to be in an extraordinary flow of spirits and gave me to understand that
on the morrow there would be grand doings in the Groves generally, and
at the Ti in particular; and urged me by no means to absent myself. In
commemoration of what event, however, or in honour of what
distinguished personage, the feast was to be given, altogether passed my
comprehension. Mehevi sought to enlighten my ignorance, but he failed as
signally as when he had endeavoured to initiate me into the perplexing
arcana of the taboo.

On leaving the Ti, Kory-Kory, who had as a matter of course accompanied
me, observing that my curiosity remained unabated, resolved to make
everything plain and satisfactory. With this intent, he escorted
me through the Taboo Groves, pointing out to my notice a variety of
objects, and endeavoured to explain them in such an indescribable jargon
of words, that it almost put me in bodily pain to listen to him. In
particular, he led me to a remarkable pyramidical structure some three
yards square at the base, and perhaps ten feet in height, which had
lately been thrown up, and occupied a very conspicuous position. It
was composed principally of large empty calabashes, with a few polished
cocoanut shells, and looked not unlike a cenotaph of skulls. My cicerone
perceived the astonishment with which I gazed at this monument of savage
crockery, and immediately addressed himself in the task of enlightening
me: but all in vain; and to this hour the nature of the monument remains
a complete mystery to me. As, however, it formed so prominent a feature
in the approaching revels, I bestowed upon the latter, in my own mind,
the title of the ‘Feast of Calabashes’.

The following morning, awaking rather late, I perceived the whole of
Marheyo’s family busily engaged in preparing for the festival.

The old warrior himself was arranging in round balls the two grey locks
of hair that were suffered to grow from the crown of his head; his
earrings and spear, both well polished, lay beside him, while the highly
decorative pair of shoes hung suspended from a projecting cane against
the side of the house. The young men were similarly employed; and the
fair damsels, including Fayaway, were anointing themselves with ‘aka’,
arranging their long tresses, and performing other matters connected
with the duties of the toilet.

Having completed their preparations, the girls now exhibited themselves
in gala costume; the most conspicuous feature of which was a necklace
of beautiful white flowers, with the stems removed, and strung closely
together upon a single fibre of tappa. Corresponding ornaments were
inserted in their ears, and woven garlands upon their heads. About their
waist they wore a short tunic of spotless white tappa, and some of them
super-added to this a mantle of the same material, tied in an elaborate
bow upon the left shoulder, and falling about the figure in picturesque
folds.

Thus arrayed, I would have matched the charming Fayaway against any
beauty in the world.

People may say what they will about the taste evinced by our fashionable
ladies in dress. Their jewels, their feathers, their silks, and
their furbelows, would have sunk into utter insignificance beside the
exquisite simplicity of attire adopted by the nymphs of the vale on this
festive occasion. I should like to have seen a gallery of coronation
beauties, at Westminster Abbey, confronted for a moment by this band of
island girls; their stiffness, formality, and affectation, contrasted
with the artless vivacity and unconcealed natural graces of these savage
maidens. It would be the Venus de’ Medici placed beside a milliner’s
doll. It was not long before Kory-Kory and myself were left alone in the
house, the rest of its inmates having departed for the Taboo Groves.
My valet was all impatience to follow them; and was as fidgety about my
dilatory movements as a diner out waiting hat in hand at the bottom
of the stairs for some lagging companion. At last, yielding to his
importunities, I set out for the Ti. As we passed the houses peeping out
from the groves through which our route lay, I noticed that they were
entirely deserted by their inhabitants.

When we reached the rock that abruptly terminated the path, and
concealed from us the festive scene, wild shouts and a confused blending
of voices assured me that the occasion, whatever it might be, had
drawn together a great multitude. Kory-Kory, previous to mounting the
elevation, paused for a moment, like a dandy at a ball-room door, to put
a hasty finish to his toilet. During this short interval, the thought
struck me that I ought myself perhaps to be taking some little pains
with my appearance.

But as I had no holiday raiment, I was not a little puzzled to devise
some means of decorating myself. However, as I felt desirous to create a
sensation, I determined to do all that lay in my power; and knowing that
I could not delight the savages more than by conforming to their style
of dress, I removed from my person the large robe of tappa which I was
accustomed to wear over my shoulders whenever I sallied into the open
air, and remained merely girt about with a short tunic descending from
my waist to my knees.

My quick-witted attendant fully appreciated the compliment I was paying
to the costume of his race, and began more sedulously to arrange the
folds of the one only garment which remained to me. Whilst he was doing
this, I caught sight of a knot of young lasses, who were sitting near us
on the grass surrounded by heaps of flowers which they were forming into
garlands. I motioned to them to bring some of their handywork to me;
and in an instant a dozen wreaths were at my disposal. One of them I
put round the apology for a hat which I had been forced to construct for
myself out of palmetto-leaves, and some of the others I converted into a
splendid girdle. These operations finished, with the slow and dignified
step of a full-dressed beau I ascended the rock.




CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

THE FEAST OF CALABASHES


The whole population of the valley seemed to be gathered within the
precincts of the grove. In the distance could be seen the long front of
the Ti, its immense piazza swarming with men, arrayed in every variety
of fantastic costume, and all vociferating with animated gestures; while
the whole interval between it and the place where I stood was enlivened
by groups of females fancifully decorated, dancing, capering, and
uttering wild exclamations. As soon as they descried me they set up a
shout of welcome; and a band of them came dancing towards me, chanting
as they approached some wild recitative. The change in my garb seemed to
transport them with delight, and clustering about me on all sides, they
accompanied me towards the Ti. When however we drew near it these joyous
nymphs paused in their career, and parting on either side, permitted me
to pass on to the now densely thronged building.

So soon as I mounted to the pi-pi I saw at a glance that the revels were
fairly under way.

What lavish plenty reigned around?--Warwick feasting his retainers with
beef and ale, was a niggard to the noble Mehevi!--All along the piazza
of the Ti were arranged elaborately carved canoe-shaped vessels, some
twenty feet in length, tied with newly made poee-poee, and sheltered
from the sun by the broad leaves of the banana. At intervals were heaps
of green bread-fruit, raised in pyramidical stacks, resembling the
regular piles of heavy shot to be seen in the yard of an arsenal.
Inserted into the interstices of the huge stones which formed the pi-pi
were large boughs of trees; hanging from the branches of which, and
screened from the sun by their foliage, were innumerable little packages
with leafy coverings, containing the meat of the numerous hogs which
had been slain, done up in this manner to make it more accessible to the
crowd. Leaning against the railing on the piazza were an immense
number of long, heavy bamboos, plugged at the lower end, and with their
projecting muzzles stuffed with a wad of leaves. These were filled with
water from the stream, and each of them might hold from four to five
gallons.

The banquet being thus spread, naught remained but for everyone to
help himself at his pleasure. Accordingly not a moment passed but the
transplanted boughs I have mentioned were rifled by the throng of the
fruit they certainly had never borne before. Calabashes of poee-poee
were continually being replenished from the extensive receptacle in
which that article was stored, and multitudes of little fires were
kindled about the Ti for the purpose of roasting the bread-fruit.

Within the building itself was presented a most extraordinary scene. The
immense lounge of mats lying between the parallel rows of the trunks of
cocoanut trees, and extending the entire length of the house, at least
two hundred feet, was covered by the reclining forms of a host of chiefs
and warriors who were eating at a great rate, or soothing the cares of
Polynesian life in the sedative fumes of tobacco. The smoke was inhaled
from large pipes, the bowls of which, made out of small cocoanut shells,
were curiously carved in strange heathenish devices. These were passed
from mouth to mouth by the recumbent smokers, each of whom, taking two
or three prodigious whiffs, handed the pipe to his neighbour; sometimes
for that purpose stretching indolently across the body of some dozing
individual whose exertions at the dinner-table had already induced
sleep.

The tobacco used among the Typees was of a very mild and pleasing
flavour, and as I always saw it in leaves, and the natives appeared
pretty well supplied with it, I was led to believe that it must have
been the growth of the valley. Indeed Kory-Kory gave me to understand
that this was the case; but I never saw a single plant growing on the
island. At Nukuheva, and, I believe, in all the other valleys, the weed
is very scarce, being only obtained in small quantities from foreigners,
and smoking is consequently with the inhabitants of these places a very
great luxury. How it was that the Typees were so well furnished with
it I cannot divine. I should think them too indolent to devote any
attention to its culture; and, indeed, as far as my observation
extended, not a single atom of the soil was under any other cultivation
than that of shower and sunshine. The tobacco-plant, however, like the
sugar-cane, may grow wild in some remote part of the vale.

There were many in the Ti for whom the tobacco did not furnish a
sufficient stimulus, and who accordingly had recourse to ‘arva’, as a
more powerful agent in producing the desired effect.

‘Arva’ is a root very generally dispersed over the South Seas, and from
it is extracted a juice, the effects of which upon the system are at
first stimulating in a moderate degree; but it soon relaxes the muscles,
and exerting a narcotic influence produces a luxurious sleep. In
the valley this beverage was universally prepared in the following
way:--Some half-dozen young boys seated themselves in a circle around
an empty wooden vessel, each one of them being supplied with a certain
quantity of the roots of the ‘arva’, broken into small bits and laid
by his side. A cocoanut goblet of water was passed around the juvenile
company, who rinsing their mouths with its contents, proceeded to the
business before them. This merely consisted in thoroughly masticating
the ‘arva’, and throwing it mouthful after mouthful into the receptacle
provided. When a sufficient quantity had been thus obtained water was
poured upon the mass, and being stirred about with the forefinger of the
right hand, the preparation was soon in readiness for use. The ‘arva’
has medicinal qualities.

Upon the Sandwich Islands it has been employed with no small success in
the treatment of scrofulous affections, and in combating the ravages
of a disease for whose frightful inroads the ill-starred inhabitants of
that group are indebted to their foreign benefactors. But the tenants of
the Typee valley, as yet exempt from these inflictions, generally employ
the ‘arva’ as a minister to social enjoyment, and a calabash of the
liquid circulates among them as the bottle with us.

Mehevi, who was greatly delighted with the change in my costume, gave
me a cordial welcome. He had reserved for me a most delectable mess
of ‘cokoo’, well knowing my partiality for that dish; and had likewise
selected three or four young cocoanuts, several roasted bread-fruit,
and a magnificent bunch of bananas, for my especial comfort and
gratification. These various matters were at once placed before me; but
Kory-Kory deemed the banquet entirely insufficient for my wants until
he had supplied me with one of the leafy packages of pork, which,
notwithstanding the somewhat hasty manner in which it had been prepared,
possessed a most excellent flavour, and was surprisingly sweet and
tender.

Pork is not a staple article of food among the people of the Marquesas;
consequently they pay little attention to the BREEDING of the swine. The
hogs are permitted to roam at large on the groves, where they obtain
no small part of their nourishment from the cocoanuts which continually
fall from the trees. But it is only after infinite labour and
difficulty, that the hungry animal can pierce the husk and shell so as
to get at the meat. I have frequently been amused at seeing one of
them, after crunching the obstinate nut with his teeth for a long time
unsuccessfully, get into a violent passion with it. He would then root
furiously under the cocoanut, and, with a fling of his snout, toss it
before him on the ground. Following it up, he would crunch at it again
savagely for a moment, and then next knock it on one side, pausing
immediately after, as if wondering how it could so suddenly have
disappeared. In this way the persecuted cocoanuts were often chased half
across the valley.

The second day of the Feast of Calabashes was ushered in by still more
uproarious noises than the first. The skins of innumerable sheep seemed
to be resounding to the blows of an army of drummers. Startled from my
slumbers by the din, I leaped up, and found the whole household engaged
in making preparations for immediate departure. Curious to discover of
what strange events these novel sounds might be the precursors, and not
a little desirous to catch a sight of the instruments which produced
the terrific noise, I accompanied the natives as soon as they were in
readiness to depart for the Taboo Groves.

The comparatively open space that extended from the Ti toward the rock,
to which I have before alluded as forming the ascent to the place, was,
with the building itself, now altogether deserted by the men; the whole
distance being filled by bands of females, shouting and dancing under
the influence of some strange excitement.

I was amused at the appearance of four or five old women who, in a state
of utter nudity, with their arms extended flatly down their sides, and
holding themselves perfectly erect, were leaping stiffly into the
air, like so many sticks bobbing to the surface, after being pressed
perpendicularly into the water. They preserved the utmost gravity of
countenance, and continued their extraordinary movements without
a single moment’s cessation. They did not appear to attract the
observation of the crowd around them, but I must candidly confess that
for my own part, I stared at them most pertinaciously.

Desirous of being enlightened in regard to the meaning of this peculiar
diversion, I turned, inquiringly to Kory-Kory; that learned Typee
immediately proceeded to explain the whole matter thoroughly. But all
that I could comprehend from what he said was, that the leaping figures
before me were bereaved widows, whose partners had been slain in battle
many moons previously; and who, at every festival, gave public evidence
in this manner of their calamities. It was evident that Kory-Kory
considered this an all-sufficient reason for so indecorous a custom; but
I must say that it did not satisfy me as to its propriety.

Leaving these afflicted females, we passed on to the Hoolah Hoolah
ground. Within the spacious quadrangle, the whole population of the
valley seemed to be assembled, and the sight presented was truly
remarkable. Beneath the sheds of bamboo which opened towards the
interior of the square reclined the principal chiefs and warriors, while
a miscellaneous throng lay at their ease under the enormous trees which
spread a majestic canopy overhead. Upon the terraces of the gigantic
altars, at each end, were deposited green bread-fruit in baskets of
cocoanut leaves, large rolls of tappa, bunches of ripe bananas, clusters
of mammee-apples, the golden-hued fruit of the artu-tree, and baked
hogs, laid out in large wooden trenchers, fancifully decorated with
freshly plucked leaves, whilst a variety of rude implements of war were
piled in confused heaps before the ranks of hideous idols. Fruits of
various kinds were likewise suspended in leafen baskets, from the tops
of poles planted uprightly, and at regular intervals, along the lower
terraces of both altars. At their base were arranged two parallel rows
of cumbersome drums, standing at least fifteen feet in height, and
formed from the hollow trunks of large trees. Their heads were covered
with shark skins, and their barrels were elaborately carved with various
quaint figures and devices. At regular intervals they were bound round
by a species of sinnate of various colours, and strips of native cloth
flattened upon them here and there. Behind these instruments were built
slight platforms, upon which stood a number of young men who, beating
violently with the palms of their hands upon the drum-heads, produced
those outrageous sounds which had awakened me in the morning. Every few
minutes these musical performers hopped down from their elevation into
the crowd below, and their places were immediately supplied by fresh
recruits. Thus an incessant din was kept up that might have startled
Pandemonium.

Precisely in the middle of the quadrangle were placed perpendicularly
in the ground, a hundred or more slender, fresh-cut poles, stripped of
their bark, and decorated at the end with a floating pennon of white
tappa; the whole being fenced about with a little picket of canes. For
what purpose these angular ornaments were intended I in vain endeavoured
to discover.

Another most striking feature of the performance was exhibited by a
score of old men, who sat cross-legged in the little pulpits, which
encircled the trunks of the immense trees growing in the middle of the
enclosure. These venerable gentlemen, who I presume were the priests,
kept up an uninterrupted monotonous chant, which was partly drowned in
the roar of drums. In the right hand they held a finely woven grass fan,
with a heavy black wooden handle curiously chased: these fans they kept
in continual motion.

But no attention whatever seemed to be paid to the drummers or to the
old priests; the individuals who composed the vast crowd present being
entirely taken up in chanting and laughing with one another, smoking,
drinking ‘arva’, and eating. For all the observation it attracted,
or the good it achieved, the whole savage orchestra might with great
advantage to its own members and the company in general, have ceased the
prodigious uproar they were making.

In vain I questioned Kory-Kory and others of the natives, as to the
meaning of the strange things that were going on; all their explanations
were conveyed in such a mass of outlandish gibberish and gesticulation
that I gave up the attempt in despair. All that day the drums resounded,
the priests chanted, and the multitude feasted and roared till sunset,
when the throng dispersed, and the Taboo Groves were again abandoned to
quiet and repose. The next day the same scene was repeated until night,
when this singular festival terminated.




CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

IDEAS SUGGESTED BY THE FEAST OF CALABASHES--INACCURACY OF CERTAIN
PUBLISHED ACCOUNTS OF THE ISLANDS--A REASON--NEGLECTED STATE OF
HEATHENISM IN THE VALLEY--EFFIGY OF A DEAD WARRIOR--A SINGULAR
SUPERSTITION--THE PRIEST KOLORY AND THE GOD MOA ARTUA--AMAZING RELIGIOUS
OBSERVANCE--A DILAPIDATED SHRINE--KORY-KORY AND THE IDOL--AN INFERENCE


Although I had been baffled in my attempts to learn the origin of
the Feast of Calabashes, yet it seemed very plain to me that it was
principally, if not wholly, of a religious character. As a religious
solemnity, however, it had not at all corresponded with the horrible
descriptions of Polynesian worship which we have received in some
published narratives, and especially in those accounts of the
evangelized islands with which the missionaries have favoured us. Did
not the sacred character of these persons render the purity of their
intentions unquestionable, I should certainly be led to suppose that
they had exaggerated the evils of Paganism, in order to enhance the
merit of their own disinterested labours.

In a certain work incidentally treating of the ‘Washington, or Northern
Marquesas Islands,’ I have seen the frequent immolation of human victims
upon the altars of their gods, positively and repeatedly charged upon
the inhabitants. The same work gives also a rather minute account of
their religion--enumerates a great many of their superstitions--and
makes known the particular designations of numerous orders of the
priesthood. One would almost imagine from the long list that is given
of cannibal primates, bishops, arch-deacons, prebendaries, and other
inferior ecclesiastics, that the sacerdotal order far outnumbered the
rest of the population, and that the poor natives were more severely
priest-ridden than even the inhabitants of the papal states. These
accounts are likewise calculated to leave upon the reader’s mind an
impression that human victims are daily cooked and served up upon the
altars; that heathenish cruelties of every description are continually
practised; and that these ignorant Pagans are in a state of the
extremest wretchedness in consequence of the grossness of their
superstitions. Be it observed, however, that all this information is
given by a man who, according to his own statement, was only at one of
the islands, and remained there but two weeks, sleeping every night on
board his ship, and taking little kid-glove excursions ashore in the
daytime, attended by an armed party.

Now, all I can say is, that in all my excursions through the valley of
Typee, I never saw any of these alleged enormities. If any of them are
practised upon the Marquesas Islands they must certainly have come to
my knowledge while living for months with a tribe of savages, wholly
unchanged from their original primitive condition, and reputed the most
ferocious in the South Seas.

The fact is, that there is a vast deal of unintentional humbuggery
in some of the accounts we have from scientific men concerning the
religious institutions of Polynesia. These learned tourists generally
obtain the greater part of their information from retired old South-Sea
rovers, who have domesticated themselves among the barbarous tribes of
the Pacific. Jack, who has long been accustomed to the long-bow, and
to spin tough yarns on the ship’s forecastle, invariably officiates as
showman of the island on which he has settled, and having mastered a few
dozen words of the language, is supposed to know all about the people
who speak it. A natural desire to make himself of consequence in the
eyes of the strangers, prompts him to lay claim to a much greater
knowledge of such matters than he actually possesses. In reply to
incessant queries, he communicates not only all he knows but a good deal
more, and if there be any information deficient still he is at no
loss to supply it. The avidity with which his anecdotes are noted
down tickles his vanity, and his powers of invention increase with the
credulity auditors. He knows just the sort of information wanted, and
furnishes it to any extent.

This is not a supposed case; I have met with several individuals like
the one described, and I have been present at two or three of their
interviews with strangers.

Now, when the scientific voyager arrives at home with his collection
of wonders, he attempts, perhaps, to give a description of some of the
strange people he has been visiting. Instead of representing them as
a community of lusty savages, who are leading a merry, idle, innocent
life, he enters into a very circumstantial and learned narrative of
certain unaccountable superstitions and practices, about which he knows
as little as the islanders themselves. Having had little time, and
scarcely any opportunity, to become acquainted with the customs he
pretends to describe, he writes them down one after another in an
off-hand, haphazard style; and were the book thus produced to be
translated into the tongue of the people of whom it purports to give the
history, it would appear quite as wonderful to them as it does to the
American public, and much more improbable.

For my own part, I am free to confess my almost entire inability to
gratify any curiosity that may be felt with regard to the theology of
the valley. I doubt whether the inhabitants themselves could do so. They
are either too lazy or too sensible to worry themselves about abstract
points of religious belief. While I was among them, they never held any
synods or councils to settle the principles of their faith by agitating
them. An unbounded liberty of conscience seemed to prevail. Those
who pleased to do so were allowed to repose implicit faith in an
ill-favoured god with a large bottle-nose and fat shapeless arms crossed
upon his breast; whilst others worshipped an image which, having no
likeness either in heaven or on earth, could hardly be called an idol.
As the islanders always maintained a discreet reserve with regard to
my own peculiar views on religion, I thought it would be excessively
ill-bred of me to pry into theirs.

But, although my knowledge of the religious faith of the Typees was
unavoidably limited, one of their superstitious observances with which I
became acquainted interested me greatly.

In one of the most secluded portions of the valley within a stone’s
cast of Fayaway’s lake--for so I christened the scene of our island
yachting--and hard by a growth of palms, which stood ranged in order
along both banks of the stream, waving their green arms as if to do
honour to its passage, was the mausoleum of a deceased, warrior chief.
Like all the other edifices of any note, it was raised upon a small
pi-pi of stones, which, being of unusual height, was a conspicuous
object from a distance. A light thatching of bleached palmetto-leaves
hung over it like a self supported canopy; for it was not until you
came very near that you saw it was supported by four slender columns of
bamboo rising at each corner to a little more than the height of a man.
A clear area of a few yards surrounded the pi-pi, and was enclosed by
four trunks of cocoanut trees resting at the angles on massive blocks of
stone. The place was sacred. The sign of the inscrutable Taboo was seen
in the shape of a mystic roll of white tappa, suspended by a twisted
cord of the same material from the top of a slight pole planted within
the enclosure*. The sanctity of the spot appeared never to have been
violated. The stillness of the grave was there, and the calm solitude
around was beautiful and touching. The soft shadows of those lofty
palm-trees!--I can see them now--hanging over the little temple, as if
to keep out the intrusive sun.

*White appears to be the sacred colour among the Marquesans.

On all sides as you approached this silent spot you caught sight of the
dead chief’s effigy, seated in the stern of a canoe, which was raised on
a light frame a few inches above the level of the pi-pi. The canoe was
about seven feet in length; of a rich, dark coloured wood, handsomely
carved and adorned in many places with variegated bindings of stained
sinnate, into which were ingeniously wrought a number of sparkling
seashells, and a belt of the same shells ran all round it. The body
of the figure--of whatever material it might have been made--was
effectually concealed in a heavy robe of brown tappa, revealing; only
the hands and head; the latter skilfully carved in wood, and surmounted
by a superb arch of plumes. These plumes, in the subdued and gentle
gales which found access to this sequestered spot, were never for one
moment at rest, but kept nodding and waving over the chief’s brow. The
long leaves of the palmetto drooped over the eaves, and through them you
saw the warrior holding his paddle with both hands in the act of rowing,
leaning forward and inclining his head, as if eager to hurry on his
voyage. Glaring at him forever, and face to face, was a polished human
skull, which crowned the prow of the canoe. The spectral figurehead,
reversed in its position, glancing backwards, seemed to mock the
impatient attitude of the warrior.

When I first visited this singular place with Kory-Kory, he told me--or
at least I so understood him--that the chief was paddling his way to
the realms of bliss, and bread-fruit--the Polynesian heaven--where
every moment the bread-fruit trees dropped their ripened spheres to the
ground, and where there was no end to the cocoanuts and bananas: there
they reposed through the livelong eternity upon mats much finer than
those of Typee; and every day bathed their glowing limbs in rivers
of cocoanut oil. In that happy land there were plenty of plumes and
feathers, and boars’-tusks and sperm-whale teeth, far preferable to all
the shining trinkets and gay tappa of the white men; and, best of all,
women far lovelier than the daughters of earth were there in abundance.
‘A very pleasant place,’ Kory-Kory said it was; ‘but after all, not much
pleasanter, he thought, than Typee.’ ‘Did he not then,’ I asked him,
‘wish to accompany the warrior?’ ‘Oh no: he was very happy where he was;
but supposed that some time or other he would go in his own canoe.’

Thus far, I think, I clearly comprehended Kory-Kory. But there was a
singular expression he made use of at the time, enforced by as singular
a gesture, the meaning of which I would have given much to penetrate.
I am inclined to believe it must have been a proverb he uttered; for I
afterwards heard him repeat the same words several times, and in what
appeared to me to be a somewhat: similar sense. Indeed, Kory-Kory had
a great variety of short, smart-sounding sentences, with which he
frequently enlivened his discourse; and he introduced them with an air
which plainly intimated, that in his opinion, they settled the matter in
question, whatever it might be.

Could it have been then, that when I asked him whether he desired to go
to this heaven of bread-fruit, cocoanuts, and young ladies, which he had
been describing, he answered by saying something equivalent to our
old adage--‘A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush’?--if he did,
Kory-Kory was a discreet and sensible fellow, and I cannot sufficiently
admire his shrewdness.

Whenever, in the course of my rambles through the valley I happened to
be near the chief’s mausoleum, I always turned aside to visit it. The
place had a peculiar charm for me; I hardly know why, but so it was. As
I leaned over the railing and gazed upon the strange effigy and watched
the play of the feathery head-dress, stirred by the same breeze which in
low tones breathed amidst the lofty palm-trees, I loved to yield myself
up to the fanciful superstition of the islanders, and could almost
believe that the grim warrior was bound heavenward. In this mood when
I turned to depart, I bade him ‘God speed, and a pleasant voyage.’ Aye,
paddle away, brave chieftain, to the land of spirits! To the material
eye thou makest but little progress; but with the eye of faith, I see
thy canoe cleaving the bright waves, which die away on those dimly
looming shores of Paradise.

This strange superstition affords another evidence of the fact, that
however ignorant man may be, he still feels within him his immortal
spirit yearning, after the unknown future.

Although the religious theories of the islands were a complete mystery
to me, their practical every-day operation could not be concealed. I
frequently passed the little temples reposing in the shadows of the
taboo groves and beheld the offerings--mouldy fruit spread out upon
a rude altar, or hanging in half-decayed baskets around some uncouth
jolly-looking image; I was present during the continuance of the
festival; I daily beheld the grinning idols marshalled rank and file in
the Hoolah Hoolah ground, and was often in the habit of meeting
those whom I supposed to be the priests. But the temples seemed to be
abandoned to solitude; the festival had been nothing more than a jovial
mingling of the tribe; the idols were quite harmless as any other logs
of wood; and the priests were the merriest dogs in the valley.

In fact religious affairs in Typee were at a very low ebb: all such
matters sat very lightly upon the thoughtless inhabitants; and, in the
celebration of many of their strange rites, they appeared merely to seek
a sort of childish amusement.

A curious evidence of this was given in a remarkable ceremony in which I
frequently saw Mehevi and several other chefs and warriors of note take
part; but never a single female.

Among those whom I looked upon as forming the priesthood of the valley,
there was one in particular who often attracted my notice, and whom
I could not help regarding as the head of the order. He was a noble
looking man, in the prime of his life, and of a most benignant aspect.
The authority this man, whose name was Kolory, seemed to exercise over
the rest, the episcopal part he took in the Feast of Calabashes, his
sleek and complacent appearance, the mystic characters which were
tattooed upon his chest, and above all the mitre he frequently wore,
in the shape of a towering head-dress, consisting of part of a cocoanut
branch, the stalk planted uprightly on his brow, and the leaflets
gathered together and passed round the temples and behind the ears, all
these pointed him out as Lord Primate of Typee. Kolory was a sort of
Knight Templar--a soldier-priest; for he often wore the dress of a
Marquesan warrior, and always carried a long spear, which, instead of
terminating in a paddle at the lower end, after the general fashion of
these weapons, was curved into a heathenish-looking little image. This
instrument, however, might perhaps have been emblematic of his double
functions. With one end in carnal combat he transfixed the enemies of
his tribe; and with the other as a pastoral crook he kept in order his
spiritual flock. But this is not all I have to say about Kolory.

His martial grace very often carried about with him what seemed to me
the half of a broken war-club. It was swathed round with ragged bits of
white tappa, and the upper part, which was intended to represent a
human head, was embellished with a strip of scarlet cloth of European
manufacture. It required little observation to discover that this
strange object was revered as a god. By the side of the big and lusty
images standing sentinel over the altars of the Hoolah Hoolah ground, it
seemed a mere pigmy in tatters. But appearances all the world over are
deceptive. Little men are sometimes very potent, and rags sometimes
cover very extensive pretensions. In fact, this funny little image was
the ‘crack’ god of the island; lording it over all the wooden lubbers
who looked so grim and dreadful; its name was Moa Artua*. And it was in
honour of Moa Artua, and for the entertainment of those who believe in
him, that the curious ceremony I am about to describe was observed.

*The word ‘Artua’, although having some other significations, is in
nearly all the Polynesian dialects used as the general designation of
the gods.


Mehevi and the chieftains of the Ti have just risen from their noontide
slumbers. There are no affairs of state to dispose of; and having eaten
two or three breakfasts in the course of the morning, the magnates of
the valley feel no appetite as yet for dinner. How are their leisure
moments to be occupied? They smoke, they chat, and at last one of their
number makes a proposition to the rest, who joyfully acquiescing, he
darts out of the house, leaps from the pi-pi, and disappears in the
grove. Soon you see him returning with Kolory, who bears the god Moa
Artua in his arms, and carries in one hand a small trough, hollowed out
in the likeness of a canoe. The priest comes along dandling his charge
as if it were a lachrymose infant he was endeavouring to put into a
good humour. Presently entering the Ti, he seats himself on the mats as
composedly as a juggler about to perform his sleight-of-hand tricks; and
with the chiefs disposed in a circle around him, commences his ceremony.
In the first place he gives Moa Artua an affectionate hug, then
caressingly lays him to his breast, and, finally, whispers something in
his ear; the rest of the company listening eagerly for a reply. But
the baby-god is deaf or dumb,--perhaps both, for never a word does, he
utter. At last Kolory speaks a little louder, and soon growing angry,
comes boldly out with what he has to say and bawls to him. He put me in
mind of a choleric fellow, who, after trying in vain to communicated a
secret to a deaf man, all at once flies into a passion and screams it
out so that every one may hear. Still Moa Artua remains as quiet as
ever; and Kolory, seemingly losing his temper, fetches him a box over
the head, strips him of his tappa and red cloth, and laying him in
a state of nudity in a little trough, covers him from sight. At this
proceeding all present loudly applaud and signify their approval by
uttering the adjective ‘motarkee’ with violent emphasis. Kolory however,
is so desirous his conduct should meet with unqualified approbation,
that he inquires of each individual separately whether under existing
circumstances he has not done perfectly right in shutting up Moa Artua.
The invariable response is ‘Aa, Aa’ (yes, yes), repeated over again
and again in a manner which ought to quiet the scruples of the most
conscientious. After a few moments Kolory brings forth his doll again,
and while arraying it very carefully in the tappa and red cloth,
alternately fondles and chides it. The toilet being completed, he once
more speaks to it aloud. The whole company hereupon show the greatest
interest; while the priest holding Moa Artua to his ear interprets to
them what he pretends the god is confidentially communicating to him.
Some items intelligence appear to tickle all present amazingly; for one
claps his hands in a rapture; another shouts with merriment; and a third
leaps to his feet and capers about like a madman.

What under the sun Moa Artua on these occasions had to say to Kolory
I never could find out; but I could not help thinking that the former
showed a sad want of spirit in being disciplined into making those
disclosures, which at first he seemed bent on withholding. Whether the
priest honestly interpreted what he believed the divinity said to him,
or whether he was not all the while guilty of a vile humbug, I shall
not presume to decide. At any rate, whatever as coming from the god
was imparted to those present seemed to be generally of a complimentary
nature: a fact which illustrates the sagacity of Kolory, or else the
timeserving disposition of this hardly used deity.

Moa Artua having nothing more to say, his bearer goes to nursing
him again, in which occupation, however, he is soon interrupted by a
question put by one of the warriors to the god. Kolory hereupon snatches
it up to his ear again, and after listening attentively, once more
officiates as the organ of communication. A multitude of questions and
answers having passed between the parties, much to the satisfaction of
those who propose them, the god is put tenderly to bed in the trough,
and the whole company unite in a long chant, led off by Kolory. This
ended, the ceremony is over; the chiefs rise to their feet in high good
humour, and my Lord Archbishop, after chatting awhile, and regaling
himself with a whiff or two from a pipe of tobacco, tucks the canoe
under his arm and marches off with it.

The whole of these proceedings were like those of a parcel of children
playing with dolls and baby houses.

For a youngster scarcely ten inches high, and with so few early
advantages as he doubtless had had, Moa Artua was certainly a precocious
little fellow if he really said all that was imputed to him; but for
what reason this poor devil of a deity, thus cuffed about, cajoled, and
shut up in a box, was held in greater estimation than the full-grown
and dignified personages of the Taboo Groves, I cannot divine. And yet
Mehevi, and other chiefs of unquestionable veracity--to say nothing of
the Primate himself--assured me over and over again that Moa Artua was
the tutelary deity of Typee, and was more to be held in honour than a
whole battalion of the clumsy idols in the Hoolah Hoolah grounds.

Kory-Kory--who seemed to have devoted considerable attention to the
study of theology, as he knew the names of all the graven images in the
valley, and often repeated them over to me--likewise entertained some
rather enlarged ideas with regard to the character and pretensions of
Moa Artua. He once gave me to understand, with a gesture there was no
misconceiving, that if he (Moa Artua) were so minded he could cause a
cocoanut tree to sprout out of his (Kory-Kory’s) head; and that it
would be the easiest thing in life for him (Moa Artua) to take the whole
island of Nukuheva in his mouth and dive down to the bottom of the sea
with it.

But in sober seriousness, I hardly knew what to make of the religion
of the valley. There was nothing that so much perplexed the illustrious
Cook, in his intercourse with the South Sea islanders, as their sacred
rites. Although this prince of navigators was in many instances assisted
by interpreters in the prosecution of his researches, he still frankly
acknowledges that he was at a loss to obtain anything like a clear
insight into the puzzling arcana of their faith. A similar admission has
been made by other eminent voyagers: by Carteret, Byron, Kotzebue, and
Vancouver.

For my own part, although hardly a day passed while I remained upon the
island that I did not witness some religious ceremony or other, it was
very much like seeing a parcel of ‘Freemasons’ making secret signs to
each other; I saw everything, but could comprehend nothing.

On the whole, I am inclined to believe, that the islanders in the
Pacific have no fixed and definite ideas whatever on the subject of
religion. I am persuaded that Kolory himself would be effectually posed
were he called upon to draw up the articles of his faith and pronounce
the creed by which he hoped to be saved. In truth, the Typees, so far
as their actions evince, submitted to no laws human or divine--always
excepting the thrice mysterious Taboo. The ‘independent electors’ of the
valley were not to be brow-beaten by chiefs, priests, idol or devils.
As for the luckless idols, they received more hard knocks than
supplications. I do not wonder that some of them looked so grim, and
stood so bolt upright as if fearful of looking to the right or the left
lest they should give any one offence. The fact is, they had to
carry themselves ‘PRETTY STRAIGHT,’ or suffer the consequences. Their
worshippers were such a precious set of fickle-minded and irreverent
heathens, that there was no telling when they might topple one of them
over, break it to pieces, and making a fire with it on the very altar
itself, fall to roasting the offerings of bread-fruit, and at them in
spite of its teeth.

In how little reverence these unfortunate deities were held by the
natives was on one occasion most convincingly proved to me.--Walking
with Kory-Kory through the deepest recesses of the groves, I perceived
a curious looking image, about six feet in height which originally had
been placed upright against a low pi-pi, surmounted by a ruinous bamboo
temple, but having become fatigued and weak in the knees, was now
carelessly leaning against it. The idol was partly concealed by the
foliage of a tree which stood near, and whose leafy boughs drooped over
the pile of stones, as if to protect the rude fane from the decay to
which it was rapidly hastening. The image itself was nothing more than
a grotesquely shaped log, carved in the likeness of a portly naked man
with the arms clasped over the head, the jaws thrown wide apart, and its
thick shapeless legs bowed into an arch. It was much decayed. The
lower part was overgrown with a bright silky moss. Thin spears of grass
sprouted from the distended mouth, and fringed the outline of the head
and arms. His godship had literally attained a green old age. All its
prominent points were bruised and battered, or entirely rotted away.
The nose had taken its departure, and from the general appearance of the
head it might have, been supposed that the wooden divinity, in despair
at the neglect of its worshippers, had been trying to beat its own
brains out against the surrounding trees.

I drew near to inspect more closely this strange object of idolatry, but
halted reverently at the distance of two or three paces, out of regard
to the religious prejudices of my valet. As soon, however, as Kory-Kory
perceived that I was in one of my inquiring, scientific moods, to my
astonishment, he sprang to the side of the idol, and pushing it away
from the stones against which it rested, endeavoured to make it stand
upon its legs. But the divinity had lost the use of them altogether; and
while Kory-Kory was trying to prop it up, placing a stick between it
and the pi-pi, the monster fell clumsily to the ground, and would have
infallibly have broken its neck had not Kory-Kory providentially broken
its fall by receiving its whole weight on his own half-crushed back. I
never saw the honest fellow in such a rage before. He leaped furiously
to his feet, and seizing the stick, began beating the poor image: every
moment, or two pausing and talking to it in the most violent manner, as
if upbraiding it for the accident. When his indignation had subsided
a little he whirled the idol about most profanely, so as to give me an
opportunity of examining it on all sides. I am quite sure I never should
have presumed to have taken such liberties with the god myself, and I
was not a little shocked at Kory-Kory’s impiety.

This anecdote speaks for itself. When one of the inferior order of
natives could show such contempt for a venerable and decrepit God of the
Groves, what the state of religion must be among the people in general
is easy to be imagined. In truth, I regard the Typees as a back-slidden
generation. They are sunk in religious sloth, and require a spiritual
revival. A long prosperity of bread-fruit and cocoanuts has rendered
them remiss in the performance of their higher obligations. The wood-rot
malady is spreading among the idols--the fruit upon their altars
is becoming offensive--the temples themselves need rethatching--the
tattooed clergy are altogether too light-hearted and lazy--and their
flocks are going astray.




CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE

GENERAL INFORMATION GATHERED AT THE FESTIVAL--PERSONAL BEAUTY OF
THE TYPEES--THEIR SUPERIORITY OVER THE INHABITANTS OF THE OTHER
ISLANDS--DIVERSITY OF COMPLEXION--A VEGETABLE COSMETIC AND
OINTMENT--TESTIMONY OF VOYAGERS TO THE UNCOMMON BEAUTY OF
THE MARQUESANS--FEW EVIDENCES OF INTERCOURSE WITH CIVILIZED
BEINGS--DILAPIDATED MUSKET--PRIMITIVE SIMPLICITY OF GOVERNMENT--REGAL
DIGNITY OF MEHEVI


Although I had been unable during the late festival to obtain
information on many interesting subjects which had much excited my
curiosity, still that important event had not passed by without adding
materially to my general knowledge of the islanders.

I was especially struck by the physical strength and beauty which
they displayed, by their great superiority in these respects over the
inhabitants of the neighbouring bay of Nukuheva, and by the singular
contrasts they presented among themselves in their various shades of
complexion.

In beauty of form they surpassed anything I had ever seen. Not a single
instance of natural deformity was observable in all the throng attending
the revels. Occasionally I noticed among the men the scars of wounds
they had received in battle; and sometimes, though very seldom, the loss
of a finger, an eye, or an arm, attributable to the same cause. With
these exceptions, every individual appeared free from those blemishes
which sometimes mar the effect of an otherwise perfect form. But their
physical excellence did not merely consist in an exemption from these
evils; nearly every individual of their number might have been taken for
a sculptor’s model.

When I remembered that these islanders derived no advantage from dress,
but appeared in all the naked simplicity of nature, I could not avoid
comparing them with the fine gentlemen and dandies who promenade such
unexceptionable figures in our frequented thoroughfares. Stripped of
the cunning artifices of the tailor, and standing forth in the garb
of Eden--what a sorry, set of round-shouldered, spindle-shanked,
crane-necked varlets would civilized men appear! Stuffed calves,
padded breasts, and scientifically cut pantaloons would then avail them
nothing, and the effect would be truly deplorable.

Nothing in the appearance of the islanders struck me more forcibly
than the whiteness of their teeth. The novelist always compares the
masticators of his heroine to ivory; but I boldly pronounce the teeth
of the Typee to be far more beautiful than ivory itself. The jaws of the
oldest graybeards among them were much better garnished than those of
most of the youths of civilized countries; while the teeth of the young
and middle-aged, in their purity and whiteness, were actually dazzling
to the eye. Their marvellous whiteness of the teeth is to be ascribed
to the pure vegetable diet of these people, and the uninterrupted
healthfulness of their natural mode of life.

The men, in almost every instance, are of lofty stature, scarcely
ever less than six feet in height, while the other sex are uncommonly
diminutive. The early period of life at which the human form arrives
at maturity in this generous tropical climate, likewise deserves to be
mentioned. A little creature, not more than thirteen years of age, and
who in other particulars might be regarded as a mere child, is often
seen nursing her own baby, whilst lads who, under less ripening skies,
would be still at school, are here responsible fathers of families.

On first entering the Typee Valley, I had been struck with the marked
contrast presented by its inhabitants with those of the bay I had
previously left. In the latter place, I had not been favourably
impressed with the personal appearance of the male portion of the
population; although with the females, excepting in some truly
melancholy instances, I had been wonderfully pleased. I had observed
that even the little intercourse Europeans had carried on with the
Nukuheva natives had not failed to leave its traces amongst them. One of
the most dreadful curses under which humanity labours had commenced its
havocks, and betrayed, as it ever does among the South Sea islanders,
the most aggravated symptoms. From this, as from all other foreign
inflictions, the yet uncontaminated tenants of the Typee Valley were
wholly exempt; and long may they continue so. Better will it be for them
for ever to remain the happy and innocent heathens and barbarians
that they now are, than, like the wretched inhabitants of the Sandwich
Islands, to enjoy the mere name of Christians without experiencing any
of the vital operations of true religion, whilst, at the same time, they
are made the victims of the worst vices and evils of civilized life.

Apart, however, from these considerations, I am inclined to believe that
there exists a radical difference between the two tribes, if indeed
they are not distinct races of men. To those who have merely touched at
Nukuheva Bay, without visiting other portions of the island, it would
hardly appear credible the diversities presented between the various
small clans inhabiting so diminutive a spot. But the hereditary
hostility which has existed between them for ages, fully accounts for
this.

Not so easy, however, is it to assign an adequate cause for the endless
variety of complexions to be seen in the Typee Valley. During the
festival, I had noticed several young females whose skins were almost as
white as any Saxon damsel’s; a slight dash of the mantling brown being
all that marked the difference. This comparative fairness of complexion,
though in a great degree perfectly natural, is partly the result of an
artificial process, and of an entire exclusion from the sun. The juice
of the ‘papa’ root found in great abundance at the head of the valley,
is held in great esteem as a cosmetic, with which many of the females
daily anoint their whole person. The habitual use of it whitens and
beautifies the skin. Those of the young girls who resort to this method
of heightening their charms, never expose themselves selves to the
rays of the sun; an observance, however, that produces little or no
inconvenience, since there are but few of the inhabited portions of the
vale which are not shaded over with a spreading canopy of boughs, so
that one may journey from house to house, scarcely deviating from the
direct course, and yet never once see his shadow cast upon the ground.

The ‘papa’, when used, is suffered to remain upon the skin for several
hours; being of a light green colour, it consequently imparts for
the time a similar hue to the complexion. Nothing, therefore, can be
imagined more singular than the appearance of these nearly naked damsels
immediately after the application of the cosmetic. To look at one of
them you would almost suppose she was some vegetable in an unripe state;
and that, instead of living in the shade for ever, she ought to be
placed out in the sun to ripen.

All the islanders are more or less in the habit of anointing themselves;
the women preferring the ‘aker’ to ‘papa’, and the men using the oil
of the cocoanut. Mehevi was remarkable fond of mollifying his entire
cuticle with this ointment. Sometimes he might be seen, with his whole
body fairly reeking with the perfumed oil of the nut, looking as if he
had just emerged from a soap-boiler’s vat, or had undergone the process
of dipping in a tallow-chandlery. To this cause perhaps, united to their
frequent bathing and extreme cleanliness, is ascribable, in a great
measure, the marvellous purity and smoothness of skin exhibited by the
natives in general.

The prevailing tint among the women of the valley was a light olive, and
of this style of complexion Fayaway afforded the most beautiful example.
Others were still darker; while not a few were of a genuine golden
colour, and some of a swarthy hue.

As agreeing with much previously mentioned in this narrative I may
here observe that Mendanna, their discoverer, in his account of the
Marquesas, described the natives as wondrously beautiful to behold, and
as nearly resembling the people of southern Europe. The first of these
islands seen by Mendanna was La Madelena, which is not far distant from
Nukuheva; and its inhabitants in every respect resemble those dwelling
on that and the other islands of the group. Figueroa, the chronicler of
Mendanna’s voyage, says, that on the morning the land was descried,
when the Spaniards drew near the shore, there sallied forth, in rude
progression, about seventy canoes, and at the same time many of the
inhabitants (females I presume) made towards the ships by swimming. He
adds, that ‘in complexion they were nearly white; of good stature,
and finely formed; and on their faces and bodies were delineated
representations of fishes and other devices’. The old Don then goes on
to say, ‘There came, among others, two lads paddling their canoe, whose
eyes were fixed on the ship; they had beautiful faces and the most
promising animation of countenance; and were in all things so becoming,
that the pilot-mayor Quiros affirmed, nothing in his life ever caused
him so much regret as the leaving such fine creatures to be lost in that
country.’* More than two hundred years have gone by since the passage of
which the above is a translation was written; and it appears to me
now, as I read it, as fresh and true as if written but yesterday. The
islanders are still the same; and I have seen boys in the Typee Valley
of whose ‘beautiful faces’ and promising ‘animation of countenance’ no
one who has not beheld them can form any adequate idea. Cook, in the
account of his voyage, pronounces the Marquesans as by far the most
splendid islanders in the South Seas. Stewart, the chaplain of the U.S.
ship Vincennes, in his ‘Scenes in the South Seas’, expresses, in more
than one place, his amazement at the surpassing loveliness of the women;
and says that many of the Nukuheva damsels reminded him forcibly of the
most celebrated beauties in his own land. Fanning, a Yankee mariner of
some reputation, likewise records his lively impressions of the physical
appearance of these people; and Commodore David Porter of the U.S.
frigate Essex, is said to have been vastly smitten by the beauty of the
ladies. Their great superiority over all other Polynesians cannot fail
to attract the notice of those who visit the principal groups in the
Pacific. The voluptuous Tahitians are the only people who at all deserve
to be compared with them; while the dark-haired Hawaiians and
the woolly-headed Feejees are immeasurably inferior to them. The
distinguishing characteristic of the Marquesan islanders, and that
which at once strikes you, is the European cast of their features--a
peculiarity seldom observable among other uncivilized people. Many of
their faces present profiles classically beautiful, and in the valley of
Typee I saw several who, like the stranger Marnoo, were in every respect
models of beauty.

* This passage, which is cited as an almost literal translation from the
original, I found in a small volume entitled ‘Circumnavigation of the
Globe, in which volume are several extracts from ‘Dalrymple’s Historical
Collections’. The last-mentioned work I have never seen, but it is said
to contain a very correct English version of great part of the learned
Doctor Christoval Suaverde da Figueroa’s History of Mendanna’s Voyage,
published at Madrid, A.D. 1613.


Some of the natives present at the Feast of Calabashes had displayed a
few articles of European dress; disposed however, about their persons
after their own peculiar fashion. Among these I perceived two pieces of
cotton-cloth which poor Toby and myself had bestowed upon our youthful
guides the afternoon we entered the valley. They were evidently reserved
for gala days; and during those of the festival they rendered the young
islanders who wore them very distinguished characters. The small number
who were similarly adorned, and the great value they appeared to place
upon the most common and most trivial articles, furnished ample evidence
of the very restricted intercourse they held with vessels touching at
the island. A few cotton handkerchiefs, of a gay pattern, tied about the
neck, and suffered to fall over the shoulder; strips of fanciful calico,
swathed about the loins, were nearly all I saw.

Indeed, throughout the valley, there were few things of any kind to
be seen of European origin. All I ever saw, besides the articles just
alluded to, were the six muskets preserved in the Ti, and three or four
similar implements of warfare hung up in other houses; some small
canvas bags, partly filled with bullets and powder, and half a dozen old
hatchet-heads, with the edges blunted and battered to such a degree
as to render them utterly useless. These last seemed to be regarded as
nearly worthless by the natives; and several times they held up, one
of them before me, and throwing it aside with a gesture of disgust,
manifested their contempt for anything that could so soon become
unserviceable.

But the muskets, the powder, and the bullets were held in most
extravagant esteem. The former, from their great age and the
peculiarities they exhibited, were well worthy a place in any
antiquarian’s armoury. I remember in particular one that hung in the
Ti, and which Mehevi--supposing as a matter of course that I was able to
repair it--had put into my hands for that purpose. It was one of those
clumsy, old-fashioned, English pieces known generally as Tower Hill
muskets, and, for aught I know, might have been left on the island by
Wallace, Carteret, Cook, or Vancouver. The stock was half rotten and
worm-eaten; the lock was as rusty and about as well adapted to its
ostensible purpose as an old door-hinge; the threading of the screws
about the trigger was completely worn away; while the barrel shook in
the wood. Such was the weapon the chief desired me to restore to its
original condition. As I did not possess the accomplishments of a
gunsmith, and was likewise destitute of the necessary tools, I was
reluctantly obliged to signify my inability to perform the task. At this
unexpected communication Mehevi regarded me, for a moment, as if he half
suspected I was some inferior sort of white man, who after all did not
know much more than a Typee. However, after a most laboured explanation
of the matter, I succeeded in making him understand the extreme
difficulty of the task. Scarcely satisfied with my apologies, however,
he marched off with the superannuated musket in something of a huff, as
if he would no longer expose it to the indignity of being manipulated by
such unskilful fingers.

During the festival I had not failed to remark the simplicity of manner,
the freedom from all restraint, and, to certain degree, the equality
of condition manifested by the natives in general. No one appeared to
assume any arrogant pretensions. There was little more than a slight
difference in costume to distinguish the chiefs from the other natives.
All appeared to mix together freely, and without any reserve; although
I noticed that the wishes of a chief, even when delivered in the mildest
tone, received the same immediate obedience which elsewhere would have
been only accorded to a peremptory command. What may be the extent
of the authority of the chiefs over the rest of the tribe, I will not
venture to assert; but from all I saw during my stay in the valley, I
was induced to believe that in matters concerning the general welfare
it was very limited. The required degree of deference towards them,
however, was willingly and cheerfully yielded; and as all authority is
transmitted from father to son, I have no doubt that one of the effects
here, as elsewhere, of high birth, is to induce respect and obedience.

The civil institutions of the Marquesas Islands appear to be in this,
as in other respects, directly the reverse of those of the Tahitian and
Hawaiian groups, where the original power of the king and chiefs was far
more despotic than that of any tyrant in civilized countries. At Tahiti
it used to be death for one of the inferior orders to approach, without
permission, under the shadow, of the king’s house; or to fail in paying
the customary reverence when food destined for the king was borne past
them by his messengers. At the Sandwich Islands, Kaahumanu, the gigantic
old dowager queen--a woman of nearly four hundred pounds weight, and
who is said to be still living at Mowee--was accustomed, in some of her
terrific gusts of temper, to snatch up an ordinary sized man who had
offended her, and snap his spine across her knee. Incredible as this
may seem, it is a fact. While at Lahainaluna--the residence of this
monstrous Jezebel--a humpbacked wretch was pointed out to me, who, some
twenty-five years previously, had had the vertebrae of his backbone very
seriously discomposed by his gentle mistress.

The particular grades of rank existing among the chiefs of Typee, I
could not in all cases determine. Previous to the Feast of Calabashes
I had been puzzled what particular station to assign to Mehevi. But the
important part he took upon that occasion convinced me that he had no
superior among the inhabitants of the valley. I had invariably noticed a
certain degree of deference paid to him by all with whom I had ever seen
him brought in contact; but when I remembered that my wanderings had
been confined to a limited portion of the valley, and that towards
the sea a number of distinguished chiefs resided, some of whom had
separately visited me at Marheyo’s house, and whom, until the Festival,
I had never seen in the company of Mehevi, I felt disposed to believe
that his rank after all might not be particularly elevated.

The revels, however, had brought together all the warriors whom I had
seen individually and in groups at different times and places. Among
them Mehevi moved with an easy air of superiority which was not to be
mistaken; and he whom I had only looked at as the hospitable host of the
Ti, and one of the military leaders of the tribe, now assumed in my eyes
the dignity of royal station. His striking costume, no less than his
naturally commanding figure, seemed indeed to give him pre-eminence over
the rest. The towering helmet of feathers that he wore raised him
in height above all who surrounded him; and though some others were
similarly adorned, the length and luxuriance of their plumes were
inferior to his.

Mehevi was in fact the greatest of the chiefs--the head of his clan--the
sovereign of the valley; and the simplicity of the social institutions
of the people could not have been more completely proved than by the
fact, that after having been several weeks in the valley, and almost in
daily intercourse with Mehevi, I should have remained until the time of
the festival ignorant of his regal character. But a new light had now
broken in upon me. The Ti was the palace--and Mehevi the king. Both the
one and the other of a most simple and patriarchal nature: it must be
allowed, and wholly unattended by the ceremonious pomp which usually
surrounds the purple.

After having made this discovery I could not avoid congratulating myself
that Mehevi had from the first taken me as it were under his royal
protection, and that he still continued to entertain for me the warmest
regard, as far at least as I was enabled to judge from appearances. For
the future I determined to pay most assiduous court to him, hoping that
eventually through his kindness I might obtain my liberty.




CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

KING MEHEVI--ALLUSION TO HIS HAWAIIAN MAJESTY--CONDUCT OF MARHEYO AND
MEHEVI IN CERTAIN DELICATE MATTERS--PECULIAR SYSTEM OF MARRIAGE--NUMBER
OF POPULATION--UNIFORMITY--EMBALMING--PLACES OF SEPULTURE--FUNERAL
OBSEQUIES AT NUKUHEVA-NUMBER OF INHABITANTS IN TYPEE--LOCATION OF THE
DWELLINGS--HAPPINESS ENJOYED IN THE VALLEY--A WARNING--SOME IDEAS WITH
REGARD TO THE PRESENT STATE OF THE HAWAIIANS--STORY OF A MISSIONARY’S
WIFE--FASHIONABLE EQUIPAGES AT OAHU--REFLECTIONS


King Mehevi!--A goodly sounding title--and why should I not bestow
it upon the foremost man in the valley of Typee? The republican
missionaries of Oahu cause to be gazetted in the Court Journal,
published at Honolulu, the most trivial movement of ‘his gracious
majesty’ King Kammehammaha III, and ‘their highnesses the princes of the
blood royal’.* And who is his ‘gracious majesty’, and what the
quality of this blood royal’?--His ‘gracious majesty’ is a fat, lazy,
negro-looking blockhead, with as little character as power. He has
lost the noble traits of the barbarian, without acquiring the redeeming
graces of a civilized being; and, although a member of the Hawiian
Temperance Society, is a most inveterate dram-drinker.

*Accounts like these are sometimes copied into English and American
journals. They lead the reader to infer that the arts and customs of
civilized life are rapidly refining the natives of the Sandwich Islands.
But let no one be deceived by these accounts. The chiefs swagger about
in gold lace and broadcloth, while the great mass of the common people
are nearly as primitive in their appearance as in the days of Cook. In
the progress of events at these islands, the two classes are receding
from each other; the chiefs are daily becoming more luxurious and
extravagant in their style of living, and the common people more and
more destitute of the necessaries and decencies of life. But the end
to which both will arrive at last will be the same: the one are fast
destroying themselves by sensual indulgences, and the other are
fast being destroyed by a complication of disorders, and the want of
wholesome food. The resources of the domineering chiefs are wrung from
the starving serfs, and every additional bauble with which they bedeck
themselves is purchased by the sufferings of their bondsmen; so that the
measure of gew-gaw refinement attained by the chiefs is only an index
to the actual state in which the greater portion of the population lie
grovelling.


The ‘blood royal’ is an extremely thick, depraved fluid; formed
principally of raw fish, bad brandy, and European sweetmeats, and is
charged with a variety of eruptive humours, which are developed in
sundry blotches and pimples upon the august face of ‘majesty itself’,
and the angelic countenances of the ‘princes and princesses of the blood
royal’!

Now, if the farcical puppet of a chief magistrate in the Sandwich
Islands be allowed the title of King, why should it be withheld from
the noble savage Mehevi, who is a thousand times more worthy of the
appellation? All hail, therefore, Mehevi, King of the Cannibal Valley,
and long life and prosperity to his Typeean majesty! May Heaven for many
a year preserve him, the uncompromising foe of Nukuheva and the French,
if a hostile attitude will secure his lovely domain from the remorseless
inflictions of South Sea civilization.

Previously to seeing the Dancing Widows I had little idea that there
were any matrimonial relations subsisting in Typee, and I should as soon
have thought of a Platonic affection being cultivated between the sexes,
as of the solemn connection of man and wife. To be sure, there were old
Marheyo and Tinor, who seemed to have a sort of nuptial understanding
with one another; but for all that, I had sometimes observed a
comical-looking old gentleman dressed in a suit of shabby tattooing, who
had the audacity to take various liberties with the lady, and that too
in the very presence of the old warrior her husband, who looked on
as good-naturedly as if nothing was happening. This behaviour, until
subsequent discoveries enlightened me, puzzled me more than anything
else I witnessed in Typee.

As for Mehevi, I had supposed him a confirmed bachelor, as well as most
of the principal chiefs. At any rate, if they had wives and families,
they ought to have been ashamed of themselves; for sure I am, they never
troubled themselves about any domestic affairs. In truth, Mehevi seemed
to be the president of a club of hearty fellows, who kept ‘Bachelor’s
Hall’ in fine style at the Ti. I had no doubt but that they regarded
children as odious incumbrances; and their ideas of domestic felicity
were sufficiently shown in the fact, that they allowed no meddlesome
housekeepers to turn topsy-turvy those snug little arrangements they had
made in their comfortable dwelling. I strongly suspected however, that
some of these jolly bachelors were carrying on love intrigues with
the maidens of the tribe; although they did not appear publicly to
acknowledge them. I happened to pop upon Mehevi three or four times when
he was romping--in a most undignified manner for a warrior king--with
one of the prettiest little witches in the valley. She lived with an
old woman and a young man, in a house near Marheyo’s; and although in
appearance a mere child herself, had a noble boy about a year old, who
bore a marvellous resemblance to Mehevi, whom I should certainly have
believed to have been the father, were it not that the little fellow
had no triangle on his face--but on second thoughts, tattooing is not
hereditary. Mehevi, however, was not the only person upon whom the
damsel Moonoony smiled--the young fellow of fifteen, who permanently
resided in the home with her, was decidedly in her good graces. I
sometimes beheld both him and the chief making love at the same time. Is
it possible, thought I, that the valiant warrior can consent to give
up a corner in the thing he loves? This too was a mystery which, with
others of the same kind, was afterwards satisfactorily explained.

During the second day of the Feast of Calabashes, Kory-Kory--being
determined that I should have some understanding on these matters--had,
in the course of his explanations, directed my attention to
a peculiarity I had frequently remarked among many of the
females;--principally those of a mature age and rather matronly
appearance. This consisted in having the right hand and the left foot
most elaborately tattooed; whilst the rest of the body was wholly free
from the operation of the art, with the exception of the minutely dotted
lips and slight marks on the shoulders, to which I have previously
referred as comprising the sole tattooing exhibited by Fayaway, in
common with other young girls of her age. The hand and foot thus
embellished were, according to Kory-Kory, the distinguishing badge of
wedlock, so far as that social and highly commendable institution is
known among those people. It answers, indeed, the same purpose as the
plain gold ring worn by our fairer spouses.

After Kory-Kory’s explanation of the subject, I was for some time
studiously respectful in the presence of all females thus distinguished,
and never ventured to indulge in the slightest approach to flirtation
with any of their number. Married women, to be sure!--I knew better than
to offend them.

A further insight, however, into the peculiar domestic customs of the
inmates of the valley did away in a measure with the severity of my
scruples, and convinced me that I was deceived in some at least of my
conclusions. A regular system of polygamy exists among the islanders;
but of a most extraordinary nature,--a plurality of husbands, instead of
wives! and this solitary fact speaks volumes for the gentle disposition
of the male population.

Where else, indeed, could such a practice exist, even for a single
day?--Imagine a revolution brought about in a Turkish seraglio, and
the harem rendered the abode of bearded men; or conceive some beautiful
woman in our own country running distracted at the sight of her numerous
lovers murdering one another before her eyes, out of jealousy for the
unequal distribution of her favours!--Heaven defend us from such a state
of things!--We are scarcely amiable and forbearing enough to submit to
it.

I was not able to learn what particular ceremony was observed in forming
the marriage contract, but am inclined to think that it must have been
of a very simple nature. Perhaps the mere ‘popping the question’, as
it is termed with us, might have been followed by an immediate nuptial
alliance. At any rate, I have more than one reason to believe that
tedious courtships are unknown in the valley of Typee.

The males considerably outnumber the females. This holds true of many
of the islands of Polynesia, although the reverse of what is the case in
most civilized countries. The girls are first wooed and won, at a very
tender age, by some stripling in the household in which they reside.
This, however, is a mere frolic of the affections, and no formal
engagement is contracted. By the time this first love has a little
subsided, a second suitor presents himself, of graver years, and carries
both boy and girl away to his own habitation. This disinterested and
generous-hearted fellow now weds the young couple--marrying damsel
and lover at the same time--and all three thenceforth live together
as harmoniously as so many turtles. I have heard of some men who in
civilized countries rashly marry large families with their wives, but
had no idea that there was any place where people married supplementary
husbands with them. Infidelity on either side is very rare. No man
has more than one wife, and no wife of mature years has less than two
husbands,--sometimes she has three, but such instances are not
frequent. The marriage tie, whatever it may be, does not appear to be
indissoluble; for separations occasionally happen. These, however,
when they do take place, produce no unhappiness, and are preceded by no
bickerings; for the simple reason, that an ill-used wife or a henpecked
husband is not obliged to file a bill in Chancery to obtain a divorce.
As nothing stands in the way of a separation, the matrimonial yoke sits
easily and lightly, and a Typee wife lives on very pleasant and sociable
terms with her husband. On the whole, wedlock, as known among these
Typees, seems to be of a more distinct and enduring nature than
is usually the case with barbarous people. A baneful promiscuous
intercourse of the sexes is hereby avoided, and virtue, without being
clamorously invoked, is, as it were, unconsciously practised.

The contrast exhibited between the Marquesas and other islands of the
Pacific in this respect, is worthy of being noticed. At Tahiti the
marriage tie was altogether unknown; and the relation of husband
and wife, father and son, could hardly be said to exist. The Arreory
Society--one of the most singular institutions that ever existed in any
part of the world--spread universal licentiousness over the island. It
was the voluptuous character of these people which rendered the disease
introduced among them by De Bougainville’s ships, in 1768, doubly
destructive. It visited them like a plague, sweeping them off by
hundreds.

Notwithstanding the existence of wedlock among the Typees, the
Scriptural injunction to increase and multiply seems to be but
indifferently attended to. I never saw any of those large families in
arithmetical or step-ladder progression which one often meets with at
home. I never knew of more than two youngsters living together in the
same home, and but seldom even that number. As for the women, it was
very plain that the anxieties of the nursery but seldom disturbed the
serenity of their souls; and they were never seen going about the valley
with half a score of little ones tagging at their apron-strings, or
rather at the bread-fruit-leaf they usually wore in the rear.

The ratio of increase among all the Polynesian nations is very small;
and in some places as yet uncorrupted by intercourse with Europeans,
the births would appear not very little to outnumber the deaths; the
population in such instances remaining nearly the same for several
successive generations, even upon those islands seldom or never
desolated by wars, and among people with whom the crime of infanticide
is altogether unknown. This would seem expressively ordained by
Providence to prevent the overstocking of the islands with a race too
indolent to cultivate the ground, and who, for that reason alone, would,
by any considerable increase in their numbers, be exposed to the most
deplorable misery. During the entire period of my stay in the valley of
Typee, I never saw more than ten or twelve children under the age of six
months, and only became aware of two births.

It is to the absence of the marriage tie that the late rapid decrease
of the population of the Sandwich Islands and of Tahiti is in part to be
ascribed. The vices and diseases introduced among these unhappy people
annually swell the ordinary mortality of the islands, while, from the
same cause, the originally small number of births is proportionally
decreased. Thus the progress of the Hawaiians and Tahitians to utter
extinction is accelerated in a sort of compound ratio.

I have before had occasion to remark, that I never saw any of the
ordinary signs of a pace of sepulture in the valley, a circumstance
which I attributed, at the time, to my living in a particular part
of it, and being forbidden to extend my rambles to any considerable
distance towards the sea. I have since thought it probable, however,
that the Typees, either desirous of removing from their sight the
evidences of mortality, or prompted by a taste for rural beauty, may
have some charming cemetery situation in the shadowy recesses along
the base of the mountains. At Nukuheva, two or three large quadrangular
‘pi-pis’, heavily flagged, enclosed with regular stone walls, and shaded
over and almost hidden from view by the interlacing branches of
enormous trees, were pointed out to me as burial-places. The bodies, I
understood, were deposited in rude vaults beneath the flagging, and were
suffered to remain there without being disinterred. Although nothing
could be more strange and gloomy than the aspect of these places, where
the lofty trees threw their dark shadows over rude blocks of stone,
a stranger looking at them would have discerned none of the ordinary
evidences of a place of sepulture.

During my stay in the valley, as none of its inmates were so
accommodating as to die and be buried in order to gratify my curiosity
with regard to their funeral rites, I was reluctantly obliged to
remain in ignorance of them. As I have reason to believe, however, the
observances of the Typees in these matters are the same with those of
all the other tribes in the island, I will here relate a scene I chanced
to witness at Nukuheva.

A young man had died, about daybreak, in a house near the beach. I had
been sent ashore that morning, and saw a good deal of the preparations
they were making for his obsequies. The body, neatly wrapped in a new
white tappa, was laid out in an open shed of cocoanut boughs, upon a
bier constructed of elastic bamboos ingeniously twisted together. This
was supported about two feet from the ground, by large canes planted
uprightly in the earth. Two females, of a dejected appearance, watched
by its side, plaintively chanting and beating the air with large grass
fans whitened with pipe-clay. In the dwelling-house adjoining a numerous
company we assembled, and various articles of food were being prepared
for consumption. Two or three individuals, distinguished by head-dresses
of beautiful tappa, and wearing a great number of ornaments, appeared
to officiate as masters of the ceremonies. By noon the entertainment had
fairly begun and we were told that it would last during the whole of
the two following days. With the exception of those who mourned by
the corpse, every one seemed disposed to drown the sense of the late
bereavement in convivial indulgence. The girls, decked out in their
savage finery, danced; the old men chanted; the warriors smoked and
chatted; and the young and lusty, of both sexes, feasted plentifully,
and seemed to enjoy themselves as pleasantly as they could have done had
it been a wedding.

The islanders understand the art of embalming, and practise it with such
success that the bodies of their great chiefs are frequently preserved
for many years in the very houses where they died. I saw three of these
in my visit to the Bay of Tior. One was enveloped in immense folds of
tappa, with only the face exposed, and hung erect against the side of
the dwelling. The others were stretched out upon biers of bamboo, in
open, elevated temples, which seemed consecrated to their memory. The
heads of enemies killed in battle are invariably preserved and hung up
as trophies in the house of the conqueror. I am not acquainted with the
process which is in use, but believe that fumigation is the principal
agency employed. All the remains which I saw presented the appearance of
a ham after being suspended for some time in a smoky chimney.

But to return from the dead to the living. The late festival had drawn
together, as I had every reason to believe, the whole population of the
vale, and consequently I was enabled to make some estimate with regard
to its numbers. I should imagine that there were about two thousand
inhabitants in Typee; and no number could have been better adapted to
the extent of the valley. The valley is some nine miles in length,
and may average one in breadth; the houses being distributed at wide
intervals throughout its whole extent, principally, however, towards the
head of the vale. There are no villages; the houses stand here and there
in the shadow of the groves, or are scattered along the banks of the
winding stream; their golden-hued bamboo sides and gleaming white thatch
forming a beautiful contrast to the perpetual verdure in which they are
embowered. There are no roads of any kind in the valley. Nothing but a
labyrinth of footpaths twisting and turning among the thickets without
end.

The penalty of the Fall presses very lightly upon the valley of Typee;
for, with the one solitary exception of striking a light, I scarcely saw
any piece of work performed there which caused the sweat to stand upon
a single brow. As for digging and delving for a livelihood, the thing is
altogether unknown. Nature has planted the bread-fruit and the banana,
and in her own good time she brings them to maturity, when the idle
savage stretches forth his hand, and satisfies his appetite.

Ill-fated people! I shudder when I think of the change a few years
will produce in their paradisaical abode; and probably when the most
destructive vices, and the worst attendances on civilization, shall have
driven all peace and happiness from the valley, the magnanimous
French will proclaim to the world that the Marquesas Islands have been
converted to Christianity! and this the Catholic world will doubtless
consider as a glorious event. Heaven help the ‘Isles of the Sea’!--The
sympathy which Christendom feels for them, has, alas! in too many
instances proved their bane.

How little do some of these poor islanders comprehend when they look
around them, that no inconsiderable part of their disasters originate
in certain tea-party excitements, under the influence of which
benevolent-looking gentlemen in white cravats solicit alms, and old
ladies in spectacles, and young ladies in sober russet gowns, contribute
sixpences towards the creation of a fund, the object of which is to
ameliorate the spiritual condition of the Polynesians, but whose end has
almost invariably been to accomplish their temporal destruction!

Let the savages be civilized, but civilize them with benefits, and not
with evils; and let heathenism be destroyed, but not by destroying the
heathen. The Anglo-Saxon hive have extirpated Paganism from the greater
part of the North American continent; but with it they have likewise
extirpated the greater portion of the Red race. Civilization is
gradually sweeping from the earth the lingering vestiges of Paganism,
and at the same time the shrinking forms of its unhappy worshippers.

Among the islands of Polynesia, no sooner are the images overturned, the
temples demolished, and the idolators converted into NOMINAL Christians,
that disease, vice, and premature death make their appearance. The
depopulated land is then recruited from the rapacious, hordes of
enlightened individuals who settle themselves within its borders,
and clamorously announce the progress of the Truth. Neat villas, trim
gardens, shaven lawns, spires, and cupolas arise, while the poor savage
soon finds himself an interloper in the country of his fathers, and
that too on the very site of the hut where he was born. The spontaneous
fruits of the earth, which God in his wisdom had ordained for the
support of the indolent natives, remorselessly seized upon and
appropriated by the stranger, are devoured before the eyes of the
starving inhabitants, or sent on board the numerous vessels which now
touch at their shores.

When the famished wretches are cut off in this manner from their natural
supplies, they are told by their benefactors to work and earn their
support by the sweat of their brows! But to no fine gentleman born to
hereditary opulence, does this manual labour come more unkindly than
to the luxurious Indian when thus robbed of the bounty of heaven.
Habituated to a life of indolence, he cannot and will not exert himself;
and want, disease, and vice, all evils of foreign growth, soon terminate
his miserable existence.

But what matters all this? Behold the glorious result!--The abominations
of Paganism have given way to the pure rites of the Christian
worship,--the ignorant savage has been supplanted by the refined
European! Look at Honolulu, the metropolis of the Sandwich Islands!--A
community of disinterested merchants, and devoted self-exiled heralds of
the Cross, located on the very spot that twenty years ago was defiled by
the presence of idolatry. What a subject for an eloquent Bible-meeting
orator! Nor has such an opportunity for a display of missionary rhetoric
been allowed to pass by unimproved!--But when these philanthropists send
us such glowing accounts of one half of their labours, why does their
modesty restrain them from publishing the other half of the good they
have wrought?--Not until I visited Honolulu was I aware of the fact that
the small remnant of the natives had been civilized into draught-horses;
and evangelized into beasts of burden. But so it is. They have been
literally broken into the traces, and are harnessed to the vehicles of
their spiritual instructors like so many dumb brutes!

          . . . . . . .

Lest the slightest misconception should arise from anything thrown out
in this chapter, or indeed in any other part of the volume, let me here
observe that against the cause of missions in, the abstract no Christian
can possibly be opposed: it is in truth a just and holy cause. But
if the great end proposed by it be spiritual, the agency employed to
accomplish that end is purely earthly; and, although the object in
view be the achievement of much good, that agency may nevertheless be
productive of evil. In short, missionary undertaking, however it may
blessed of heaven, is in itself but human; and subject, like everything
else, to errors and abuses. And have not errors and abuses crept into
the most sacred places, and may there not be unworthy or incapable
missionaries abroad, as well as ecclesiastics of similar character
at home? May not the unworthiness or incapacity of those who assume
apostolic functions upon the remote islands of the sea more easily
escape detection by the world at large than if it were displayed in
the heart of a city? An unwarranted confidence in the sanctity of its
apostles--a proneness to regard them as incapable of guile--and
an impatience of the least suspicion to their rectitude as men or
Christians, have ever been prevailing faults in the Church. Nor is this
to be wondered at: for subject as Christianity is to the assaults of
unprincipled foes, we are naturally disposed to regard everything like
an exposure of ecclesiastical misconduct as the offspring of malevolence
or irreligious feeling. Not even this last consideration, however shall
deter me from the honest expression of my sentiments.

There is something apparently wrong in the practical operations of
the Sandwich Islands Mission. Those who from pure religious motives
contribute to the support of this enterprise should take care to
ascertain that their donations, flowing through many devious channels,
at last effect their legitimate object, the conversion of the Hawaiians.
I urge this not because I doubt the moral probity of those who disburse
the funds, but because I know that they are not rightly applied. To read
pathetic accounts of missionary hardships, and glowing descriptions of
conversion, and baptisms, taking place beneath palm-trees, is one thing;
and to go to the Sandwich Islands and see the missionaries dwelling
in picturesque and prettily furnished coral-rock villas, whilst the
miserable natives are committing all sorts of immorality around them, is
quite another.

In justice to the missionaries, however, I will willingly admit, that
where-ever evils may have resulted from their collective mismanagement
of the business of the mission, and from the want of vital piety evinced
by some of their number, still the present deplorable condition of the
Sandwich Islands is by no means wholly chargeable against them. The
demoralizing influence of a dissolute foreign population, and the
frequent visits of all descriptions of vessels, have tended not a little
to increase the evils alluded to. In a word, here, as in every case
where civilization has in any way been introduced among those whom we
call savages, she has scattered her vices, and withheld her blessings.

As wise a man as Shakespeare has said, that the bearer of evil tidings
hath but a losing office; and so I suppose will it prove with me, in
communicating to the trusting friends of the Hawiian Mission what has
been disclosed in various portions of this narrative. I am persuaded,
however, that as these disclosures will by their very nature attract
attention, so they will lead to something which will not be without
ultimate benefit to the cause of Christianity in the Sandwich Islands.

I have but one more thing to add in connection with this subject--those
things which I have stated as facts will remain facts, in spite of
whatever the bigoted or incredulous may say or write against them. My
reflections, however, on those facts may not be free from error. If such
be the case, I claim no further indulgence than should be conceded to
every man whose object is to do good.




CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

THE SOCIAL CONDITION AND GENERAL CHARACTER OF THE TYPEES


I have already mentioned that the influence exerted over the people
of the valley by their chiefs was mild in the extreme; and as to any
general rule or standard of conduct by which the commonality were
governed in their intercourse with each other, so far as my observation
extended, I should be almost tempted to say, that none existed on the
island, except, indeed, the mysterious ‘Taboo’ be considered as such.
During the time I lived among the Typees, no one was ever put upon his
trial for any offence against the public. To all appearance there
were no courts of law or equity. There was no municipal police for the
purpose of apprehending vagrants and disorderly characters. In
short, there were no legal provisions whatever for the well-being and
conservation of society, the enlightened end of civilized legislation.
And yet everything went on in the valley with a harmony and smoothness
unparalleled, I will venture to assert, in the most select, refined, and
pious associations of mortals in Christendom. How are we to explain this
enigma? These islanders were heathens! savages! ay, cannibals! and how
came they without the aid of established law, to exhibit, in so eminent
a degree, that social order which is the greatest blessing and highest
pride of the social state?

It may reasonably be inquired, how were these people governed? how were
their passions controlled in their everyday transactions? It must have
been by an inherent principle of honesty and charity towards each other.
They seemed to be governed by that sort of tacit common-sense law which,
say what they will of the inborn lawlessness of the human race, has
its precepts graven on every breast. The grand principles of virtue and
honour, however they may be distorted by arbitrary codes, are the same
all the world over: and where these principles are concerned, the right
or wrong of any action appears the same to the uncultivated as to the
enlightened mind. It is to this indwelling, this universally diffused
perception of what is just and noble, that the integrity of the
Marquesans in their intercourse with each other, is to be attributed.
In the darkest nights they slept securely, with all their worldly wealth
around them, in houses the doors of which were never fastened. The
disquieting ideas of theft or assassination never disturbed them.

Each islander reposed beneath his own palmetto thatching, or sat under
his own bread-fruit trees, with none to molest or alarm him. There was
not a padlock in the valley, nor anything that answered the purpose
of one: still there was no community of goods. This long spear, so
elegantly carved, and highly polished, belongs to Wormoonoo: it is far
handsomer than the one which old Marheyo so greatly prizes; it is the
most valuable article belonging to its owner. And yet I have seen it
leaning against a cocoanut tree in the grove, and there it was found
when sought for. Here is a sperm-whale tooth, graven all over with
cunning devices: it is the property of Karluna; it is the most precious
of the damsel’s ornaments. In her estimation its price is far above
rubies--and yet there hangs the dental jewel by its cord of braided
bark, in the girl’s house, which is far back in the valley; the door is
left open, and all the inmates have gone off to bathe in the stream.*

*The strict honesty which the inhabitants of nearly all the Polynesian
Islands manifest toward each other, is in striking contrast with the
thieving propensities some of them evince in their intercourse with
foreigners. It would almost seem that, according to their peculiar code
of morals, the pilfering of a hatchet or a wrought nail from a European,
is looked upon as a praiseworthy action. Or rather, it may be presumed,
that bearing in mind the wholesale forays made upon them by their
nautical visitors, they consider the property of the latter as a fair
object of reprisal. This consideration, while it serves to reconcile an
apparent contradiction in the moral character of the islanders, should
in some measure alter that low opinion of it which the reader of South
Sea voyages is too apt to form.


So much for the respect in which ‘personal property’ is held in Typee;
how secure an investment of ‘real property’ may be, I cannot take upon
me to say. Whether the land of the valley was the joint property of its
inhabitants, or whether it was parcelled out among a certain number of
landed proprietors who allowed everybody to ‘squat’ and ‘poach’ as
much as he or she pleased, I never could ascertain. At any rate, musty
parchments and title-deeds there were none on the island; and I am half
inclined to believe that its inhabitants hold their broad valleys in fee
simple from Nature herself; to have and to hold, so long as grass grows
and water runs; or until their French visitors, by a summary mode of
conveyancing, shall appropriate them to their own benefit and behoof.

Yesterday I saw Kory-Kory hie him away, armed with a long pole, with
which, standing on the ground, he knocked down the fruit from the
topmost boughs of the trees, and brought them home in his basket of
cocoanut leaves. Today I see an islander, whom I know to reside in a
distant part of the valley, doing the self-same thing. On the sloping
bank of the stream are a number of banana-trees I have often seen a
score or two of young people making a merry foray on the great golden
clusters, and bearing them off, one after another, to different parts
of the vale, shouting and trampling as they went. No churlish old
curmudgeon could have been the owner of that grove of bread-fruit trees,
or of these gloriously yellow bunches of bananas.

From what I have said it will be perceived that there is a vast
difference between ‘personal property’ and ‘real estate’ in the valley
of Typee. Some individuals, of course, are more wealthy than others.
For example, the ridge-pole of Marheyo’s house bends under the weight of
many a huge packet of tappa; his long couch is laid with mats placed one
upon the other seven deep. Outside, Tinor has ranged along in her
bamboo cupboard--or whatever the place may be called--a goodly array of
calabashes and wooden trenchers. Now, the house just beyond the grove,
and next to Marheyo’s, occupied by Ruaruga, is not quite so well
furnished. There are only three moderate-sized packages swinging
overhead: there are only two layers of mats beneath; and the calabashes
and trenchers are not so numerous, nor so tastefully stained and carved.
But then, Ruaruga has a house--not so pretty a one, to be sure--but just
as commodious as Marheyo’s; and, I suppose, if he wished to vie with
his neighbour’s establishment, he could do so with very little trouble.
These, in short, constituted the chief differences perceivable in the
relative wealth of the people in Typee.

Civilization does not engross all the virtues of humanity: she has not
even her full share of them. They flourish in greater abundance and
attain greater strength among many barbarous people. The hospitality
of the wild Arab, the courage of the North American Indian, and the
faithful friendship of some of the Polynesian nations, far surpass
anything of a similar kind among the polished communities of Europe. If
truth and justice, and the better principles of our nature, cannot
exist unless enforced by the statute-book, how are we to account for the
social condition of the Typees? So pure and upright were they in all the
relations of life, that entering their valley, as I did, under the most
erroneous impressions of their character, I was soon led to exclaim in
amazement: ‘Are these the ferocious savages, the blood-thirsty cannibals
of whom I have heard such frightful tales! They deal more kindly with
each other, and are more humane than many who study essays on virtue and
benevolence, and who repeat every night that beautiful prayer breathed
first by the lips of the divine and gentle Jesus.’ I will frankly
declare that after passing a few weeks in this valley of the Marquesas,
I formed a higher estimate of human nature than I had ever before
entertained. But alas! since then I have been one of the crew of a
man-of-war, and the pent-up wickedness of five hundred men has nearly
overturned all my previous theories.

There was one admirable trait in the general character of the Typees
which, more than anything else, secured my admiration: it was the
unanimity of feeling they displayed on every occasion. With them
there hardly appeared to be any difference of opinion upon any subject
whatever. They all thought and acted alike. I do not conceive that they
could support a debating society for a single night: there would be
nothing to dispute about; and were they to call a convention to take
into consideration the state of the tribe, its session would be a
remarkably short one. They showed this spirit of unanimity in every
action of life; everything was done in concert and good fellowship. I
will give an instance of this fraternal feeling.

One day, in returning with Kory-Kory from my accustomed visit to the
Ti, we passed by a little opening in the grove; on one side of which,
my attendant informed me, was that afternoon to be built a dwelling of
bamboo. At least a hundred of the natives were bringing materials to the
ground, some carrying in their hands one or two of the canes which were
to form the sides, others slender rods of the habiscus, strung with
palmetto leaves, for the roof. Every one contributed something to the
work; and by the united, but easy, and even indolent, labours of all,
the entire work was completed before sunset. The islanders, while
employed in erecting this tenement, reminded me of a colony of beavers
at work. To be sure, they were hardly as silent and demure as those
wonderful creatures, nor were they by any means as diligent. To tell the
truth they were somewhat inclined to be lazy, but a perfect tumult of
hilarity prevailed; and they worked together so unitedly, and seemed
actuated by such an instinct of friendliness, that it was truly
beautiful to behold.

Not a single female took part in this employment: and if the degree of
consideration in which the ever-adorable sex is held by the men be--as
the philosophers affirm--a just criterion of the degree of refinement
among a people, then I may truly pronounce the Typees to be as polished
a community as ever the sun shone upon. The religious restrictions of
the taboo alone excepted, the women of the valley were allowed every
possible indulgence. Nowhere are the ladies more assiduously courted;
nowhere are they better appreciated as the contributors to our highest
enjoyments; and nowhere are they more sensible of their power. Far
different from their condition among many rude nations, where the women
are made to perform all the work while their ungallant lords and masters
lie buried in sloth, the gentle sex in the valley of Typee were exempt
from toil, if toil it might be called that, even in the tropical
climate, never distilled one drop of perspiration. Their light household
occupations, together with the manufacture of tappa, the platting of
mats, and the polishing of drinking-vessels, were the only employments
pertaining to the women. And even these resembled those pleasant
avocations which fill up the elegant morning leisure of our fashionable
ladies at home. But in these occupations, slight and agreeable though
they were, the giddy young girls very seldom engaged. Indeed these
wilful care-killing damsels were averse to all useful employment.

Like so many spoiled beauties, they ranged through the groves--bathed
in the stream--danced--flirted--played all manner of mischievous pranks,
and passed their days in one merry round of thoughtless happiness.

During my whole stay on the island I never witnessed a single quarrel,
nor anything that in the slightest degree approached even to a dispute.
The natives appeared to form one household, whose members were bound
together by the ties of strong affection. The love of kindred I did not
so much perceive, for it seemed blended in the general love; and where
all were treated as brothers and sisters, it was hard to tell who were
actually related to each other by blood.

Let it not be supposed that I have overdrawn this picture. I have
not done so. Nor let it be urged, that the hostility of this tribe
to foreigners, and the hereditary feuds they carry on against their
fellow-islanders beyond the mountains, are facts which contradict me.
Not so; these apparent discrepancies are easily reconciled. By many a
legendary tale of violence and wrong, as well as by events which have
passed before their eyes, these people have been taught to look upon
white men with abhorrence. The cruel invasion of their country by Porter
has alone furnished them with ample provocation; and I can sympathize
in the spirit which prompts the Typee warrior to guard all the passes to
his valley with the point of his levelled spear, and, standing upon
the beach, with his back turned upon his green home, to hold at bay the
intruding European.

As to the origin of the enmity of this particular clan towards the
neighbouring tribes, I cannot so confidently speak. I will not say that
their foes are the aggressors, nor will I endeavour to palliate their
conduct. But surely, if our evil passions must find vent, it is far
better to expend them on strangers and aliens, than in the bosom of
the community in which we dwell. In many polished countries civil
contentions, as well as domestic enmities, are prevalent, and the same
time that the most atrocious foreign wars are waged. How much less
guilty, then, are our islanders, who of these three sins are only
chargeable with one, and that the least criminal!

The reader will ere long have reason to suspect that the Typees are not
free from the guilt of cannibalism; and he will then, perhaps, charge me
with admiring a people against whom so odious a crime is chargeable. But
this only enormity in their character is not half so horrible as it
is usually described. According to the popular fictions, the crews of
vessels, shipwrecked on some barbarous coast, are eaten alive like so
many dainty joints by the uncivil inhabitants; and unfortunate voyagers
are lured into smiling and treacherous bays; knocked on the head with
outlandish war-clubs; and served up without any prelimary dressing. In
truth, so horrific and improbable are these accounts, that many sensible
and well-informed people will not believe that any cannibals exist; and
place every book of voyages which purports to give any account of them,
on the same shelf with Blue Beard and Jack the Giant-Killer. While
others, implicitly crediting the most extravagant fictions, firmly
believe that there are people in the world with tastes so depraved that
they would infinitely prefer a single mouthful of material humanity to
a good dinner of roast beef and plum pudding. But here, Truth, who loves
to be centrally located, is again found between the two extremes; for
cannibalism to a certain moderate extent is practised among several of
the primitive tribes in the Pacific, but it is upon the bodies of slain
enemies alone, and horrible and fearful as the custom is, immeasurably
as it is to be abhorred and condemned, still I assert that those who
indulge in it are in other respects humane and virtuous.




CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT

FISHING PARTIES--MODE OF DISTRIBUTING THE FISH--MIDNIGHT
BANQUET--TIME-KEEPING TAPERS--UNCEREMONIOUS STYLE OF EATING THE FISH


There was no instance in which the social and kindly dispositions of the
Typees were more forcibly evinced than in the manner the conducted their
great fishing parties. Four times during my stay in the valley the young
men assembled near the full of the moon, and went together on these
excursions. As they were generally absent about forty-eight hours, I was
led to believe that they went out towards the open sea, some distance
from the bay. The Polynesians seldom use a hook and line, almost always
employing large well-made nets, most ingeniously fabricated from the
twisted fibres of a certain bark. I examined several of them which had
been spread to dry upon the beach at Nukuheva. They resemble very much
our own seines, and I should think they were nearly as durable.

All the South Sea Islanders are passionately fond of fish; but none
of them can be more so than the inhabitants of Typee. I could not
comprehend, therefore, why they so seldom sought it in their waters, for
it was only at stated times that the fishing parties were formed, and
these occasions were always looked forward to with no small degree of
interest.

During their absence the whole population of the place were in a
ferment, and nothing was talked of but ‘pehee, pehee’ (fish, fish).
Towards the time when they were expected to return the vocal telegraph
was put into operation--the inhabitants, who were scattered throughout
the length of the valley, leaped upon rocks and into trees, shouting
with delight at the thoughts of the anticipated treat. As soon as the
approach of the party was announced, there was a general rush of the
men towards the beach; some of them remaining, however, about the Ti in
order to get matters in readiness for the reception of the fish, which
were brought to the Taboo Groves in immense packages of leaves, each one
of them being suspended from a pole carried on the shoulders of two men.

I was present at the Ti on one of these occasions, and the sight was
most interesting. After all the packages had arrived, they were laid in
a row under the verandah of the building and opened.

The fish were all quite small, generally about the size of a herring,
and of every variety. About one-eighth of the whole being reserved
for the use of the Ti itself, the remainder was divided into numerous
smaller packages, which were immediately dispatched in every direction
to the remotest parts of the valley. Arrived at their destination, these
were in turn portioned out, and equally distributed among the various
houses of each particular district. The fish were under a strict Taboo,
until the distribution was completed, which seemed to be effected in the
most impartial manner. By the operation of this system every man, woman,
and child in the vale, were at one and the same time partaking of this
favourite article of food.

Once I remember the party arrived at midnight; but the unseasonableness
of the tour did not repress the impatience of the islanders. The
carriers dispatched from the Ti were to be seen hurrying in all
directions through the deep groves; each individual preceded by a boy
bearing a flaming torch of dried cocoanut boughs, which from time to
time was replenished from the materials scattered along the path. The
wild glare of these enormous flambeaux, lighting up with a startling
brilliancy the innermost recesses of the vale, and seen moving rapidly
along beneath the canopy of leaves, the savage shout of the excited
messengers sounding the news of their approach, which was answered
on all sides, and the strange appearance of their naked bodies, seen
against the gloomy background, produced altogether an effect upon my
mind that I shall long remember.

It was on this same occasion that Kory-Kory awakened me at the dead
hour of night, and in a sort of transport communicated the intelligence
contained in the words ‘pehee perni’ (fish come). As I happened to have
been in a remarkably sound and refreshing slumber, I could not imagine
why the information had not been deferred until morning, indeed, I felt
very much inclined to fly into a passion and box my valet’s ears; but on
second thoughts I got quietly up, and on going outside the house was not
a little interested by the moving illumination which I beheld.

When old Marheyo received his share of the spoils, immediate
preparations were made for a midnight banquet; calabashes of poee-poee
were filled to the brim; green bread-fruit were roasted; and a huge cake
of ‘amar’ was cut up with a sliver of bamboo and laid out on an immense
banana-leaf.

At this supper we were lighted by several of the native tapers, held in
the hands of young girls. These tapers are most ingeniously made. There
is a nut abounding in the valley, called by the Typees ‘armor’, closely
resembling our common horse-chestnut. The shell is broken, and the
contents extracted whole. Any number of these are strung at pleasure
upon the long elastic fibre that traverses the branches of the cocoanut
tree. Some of these tapers are eight or ten feet in length; but being
perfectly flexible, one end is held in a coil, while the other is
lighted. The nut burns with a fitful bluish flame, and the oil that it
contains is exhausted in about ten minutes. As one burns down, the next
becomes ignited, and the ashes of the former are knocked into a cocoanut
shell kept for the purpose. This primitive candle requires continual
attention, and must be constantly held in the hand. The person so
employed marks the lapse of time by the number of nuts consumed, which
is easily learned by counting the bits of tappa distributed at regular
intervals along the string.

I grieve to state so distressing a fact, but the inhabitants of
Typee were in the habit of devouring fish much in the same way that
a civilized being would eat a radish, and without any more previous
preparation. They eat it raw; scales, bones, gills, and all the inside.
The fish is held by the tail, and the head being introduced into the
mouth, the animal disappears with a rapidity that would at first nearly
lead one to imagine it had been launched bodily down the throat.

Raw fish! Shall I ever forget my sensations when I first saw my island
beauty devour one. Oh, heavens! Fayaway, how could you ever have
contracted so vile a habit? However, after the first shock had subsided,
the custom grew less odious in my eyes, and I soon accustomed myself to
the sight. Let no one imagine, however, that the lovely Fayaway was in
the habit of swallowing great vulgar-looking fishes: oh, no; with her
beautiful small hand she would clasp a delicate, little, golden-hued
love of a fish and eat it as elegantly and as innocently as though it
were a Naples biscuit. But alas! it was after all a raw fish; and all I
can say is, that Fayaway ate it in a more ladylike manner than any other
girl of the valley.

When at Rome do as the Romans do, I held to be so good a proverb, that
being in Typee I made a point of doing as the Typees did. Thus I
ate poee-poee as they did; I walked about in a garb striking for its
simplicity; and I reposed on a community of couches; besides doing many
other things in conformity with their peculiar habits; but the farthest
I ever went in the way of conformity, was on several occasions to regale
myself with raw fish. These being remarkably tender, and quite small,
the undertaking was not so disagreeable in the main, and after a few
trials I positively began to relish them; however, I subjected them to a
slight operation with a knife previously to making my repast.




CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE

NATURAL HISTORY OF THE VALLEY--GOLDEN LIZARDS--TAMENESS OF THE
BIRDS--MOSQUITOES--FLIES--DOGS--A SOLITARY CAT--THE CLIMATE--THE
COCOANUT TREE--SINGULAR MODES OF CLIMBING IT--AN AGILE YOUNG
CHIEF--FEARLESSNESS OF THE CHILDREN--TOO-TOO AND THE COCOANUT TREE--THE
BIRDS OF THE VALLEY


I think I must enlighten the reader a little about the natural history
of the valley.

Whence, in the name of Count Buffon and Baron Cuvier, came those dogs
that I saw in Typee? Dogs!--Big hairless rats rather; all with smooth,
shining speckled hides--fat sides, and very disagreeable faces. Whence
could they have come? That they were not the indigenous production of
the region, I am firmly convinced. Indeed they seemed aware of their
being interlopers, looking fairly ashamed, and always trying to hide
themselves in some dark corner. It was plain enough they did not feel at
home in the vale--that they wished themselves well out of it, and back
to the ugly country from which they must have come.

Scurvy curs! they were my abhorrence; I should have liked nothing
better than to have been the death of every one of them. In fact, on one
occasion, I intimated the propriety of a canine crusade to Mehevi; but
the benevolent king would not consent to it. He heard me very patiently;
but when I had finished, shook his head, and told me in confidence that
they were ‘taboo’.

As for the animal that made the fortune of the ex-lord-mayor
Whittington, I shall never forget the day that I was lying in the house
about noon, everybody else being fast asleep; and happening to raise
my eyes, met those of a big black spectral cat, which sat erect in the
doorway, looking at me with its frightful goggling green orbs, like one
of those monstrous imps that torment some of Teniers’ saints! I am one
of those unfortunate persons to whom the sight of these animals are, at
any time an insufferable annoyance.

Thus constitutionally averse to cats in general, the unexpected
apparition of this one in particular utterly confounded me. When I had
a little recovered from the fascination of its glance, I started up; the
cat fled, and emboldened by this, I rushed out of the house in pursuit;
but it had disappeared. It was the only time I ever saw one in the
valley, and how it got there I cannot imagine. It is just possible that
it might have escaped from one of the ships at Nukuheva. It was in vain
to seek information on the subject from the natives, since none of them
had seen the animal, the appearance of which remains a mystery to me to
this day.

Among the few animals which are to be met with in Typee, there was none
which I looked upon with more interest than a beautiful golden-hued
species of lizard. It measured perhaps five inches from head to tail,
and was most gracefully proportioned. Numbers of those creatures were
to be seen basking in the sunshine upon the thatching of the houses, and
multitudes at all hours of the day showed their glittering sides as they
ran frolicking between the spears of grass or raced in troops up and
down the tall shafts of the cocoanut trees. But the remarkable beauty
of these little animals and their lively ways were not their only claims
upon my admiration. They were perfectly tame and insensible to fear.
Frequently, after seating myself upon the ground in some shady place
during the heat of the day, I would be completely overrun with them.
If I brushed one off my arm, it would leap perhaps into my hair: when I
tried to frighten it away by gently pinching its leg, it would turn for
protection to the very hand that attacked it.

The birds are also remarkably tame. If you happened to see one perched
upon a branch within reach of your arm, and advanced towards it, it did
not fly away immediately, but waited quietly looking at you, until you
could almost touch it, and then took wing slowly, less alarmed at your
presence, it would seem, than desirous of removing itself from your
path. Had salt been less scarce in the valley than it was, this was the
very place to have gone birding with it. I remember that once, on an
uninhabited island of the Gallipagos, a bird alighted on my outstretched
arm, while its mate chirped from an adjoining tree. Its tameness, far
from shocking me, as a similar occurrence did Selkirk, imparted to
me the most exquisite thrill of delight I ever experienced, and with
somewhat of the same pleasure did I afterwards behold the birds and
lizards of the valley show their confidence in the kindliness of man.

Among the numerous afflictions which the Europeans have entailed upon
some of the natives of the South Seas, is the accidental introduction
among them of that enemy of all repose and ruffler of even tempers--the
Mosquito. At the Sandwich Islands and at two or three of the Society
group, there are now thriving colonies of these insects, who promise ere
long to supplant altogether the aboriginal sand-flies. They sting, buzz,
and torment, from one end of the year to the other, and by incessantly
exasperating the natives materially obstruct the benevolent labours of
the missionaries.

From this grievous visitation, however the Typees are as yet wholly
exempt; but its place is unfortunately in some degree supplied by the
occasional presence of a minute species of fly, which, without stinging,
is nevertheless productive of no little annoyance. The tameness of the
birds and lizards is as nothing when compared to the fearless confidence
of this insect. He will perch upon one of your eye-lashes, and go to
roost there if you do not disturb him, or force his way through your
hair, or along the cavity of the nostril, till you almost fancy he is
resolved to explore the very brain itself. On one occasion I was so
inconsiderate as to yawn while a number of them were hovering around
me. I never repeated the act. Some half-dozen darted into the open
apartment, and began walking about its ceiling; the sensation was
dreadful. I involuntarily closed my mouth, and the poor creatures being
enveloped in inner darkness, must in their consternation have stumbled
over my palate, and been precipitated into the gulf beneath. At any
rate, though I afterwards charitably held my mouth open for at least
five minutes, with a view of affording egress to the stragglers, none of
them ever availed themselves of the opportunity.

There are no wild animals of any kind on the island unless it be decided
that the natives themselves are such. The mountains and the interior
present to the eye nothing but silent solitudes, unbroken by the roar
of beasts of prey, and enlivened by few tokens even of minute animated
existence. There are no venomous reptiles, and no snakes of any
description to be found in any of the valleys.

In a company of Marquesan natives the weather affords no topic of
conversation. It can hardly be said to have any vicissitudes. The rainy
season, it is true, brings frequent showers, but they are intermitting
and refreshing. When an islander bound on some expedition rises from his
couch in the morning, he is never solicitous to peep out and see how the
sky looks, or ascertain from what quarter the wind blows. He is always
sure of a ‘fine day’, and the promise of a few genial showers he hails
with pleasure. There is never any of that ‘remarkable weather’ on the
islands which from time immemorial has been experienced in America, and
still continues to call forth the wondering conversational exclamations
of its elderly citizens. Nor do there even occur any of those eccentric
meteorological changes which elsewhere surprise us. In the valley of
Typee ice-creams would never be rendered less acceptable by sudden
frosts, nor would picnic parties be deferred on account of inauspicious
snowstorms: for there day follows day in one unvarying round of summer
and sunshine, and the whole year is one long tropical month of June just
melting into July.

It is this genial climate which causes the cocoanuts to flourish as they
do. This invaluable fruit, brought to perfection by the rich soil of the
Marquesas, and home aloft on a stately column more than a hundred feet
from the ground, would seem at first almost inaccessible to the simple
natives. Indeed the slender, smooth, and soaring shaft, without a single
limb or protuberance of any kind to assist one in mounting it, presents
an obstacle only to be overcome by the surprising agility and ingenuity
of the islanders. It might be supposed that their indolence would lead
them patiently to await the period when the ripened nuts, slowly parting
from their stems, fall one by one to the ground. This certainly would
be the case, were it not that the young fruit, encased in a soft green
husk, with the incipient meat adhering in a jelly-like pellicle to its
sides, and containing a bumper of the most delicious nectar, is what
they chiefly prize. They have at least twenty different terms to express
as many progressive stages in the growth of the nut. Many of them reject
the fruit altogether except at a particular period of its growth, which,
incredible as it may appear, they seemed to me to be able to ascertain
within an hour or two. Others are still more capricious in their
tastes; and after gathering together a heap of the nuts of all ages, and
ingeniously tapping them, will first sip from one and then from another,
as fastidiously as some delicate wine-bibber experimenting glass in hand
among his dusty demi-johns of different vintages.

Some of the young men, with more flexible frames than their comrades,
and perhaps with more courageous souls, had a way of walking up
the trunk of the cocoanut trees which to me seemed little less than
miraculous; and when looking at them in the act, I experienced that
curious perplexity a child feels when he beholds a fly moving feet
uppermost along a ceiling.

I will endeavour to describe the way in which Narnee, a noble young
chief, sometimes performed this feat for my peculiar gratification; but
his preliminary performances must also be recorded. Upon my signifying
my desire that he should pluck me the young fruit of some particular
tree, the handsome savage, throwing himself into a sudden attitude of
surprise, feigns astonishment at the apparent absurdity of the request.
Maintaining this position for a moment, the strange emotions depicted on
his countenance soften down into one of humorous resignation to my will,
and then looking wistfully up to the tufted top of the tree, he
stands on tip-toe, straining his neck and elevating his arm, as though
endeavouring to reach the fruit from the ground where he stands. As
if defeated in this childish attempt, he now sinks to the earth
despondingly, beating his breast in well-acted despair; and then,
starting to his feet all at once, and throwing back his head, raises
both hands, like a school-boy about to catch a falling ball. After
continuing this for a moment or two, as if in expectation that the fruit
was going to be tossed down to him by some good spirit in the tree-top,
he turns wildly round in another fit of despair, and scampers off to the
distance of thirty or forty yards. Here he remains awhile, eyeing the
tree, the very picture of misery; but the next moment, receiving, as it
were, a flash of inspiration, he rushes again towards it, and clasping
both arms about the trunk, with one elevated a little above the other,
he presses the soles of his feet close together against the tree,
extending his legs from it until they are nearly horizontal, and his
body becomes doubled into an arch; then, hand over hand and foot over
foot, he rises from the earth with steady rapidity, and almost before
you are aware of it, has gained the cradled and embowered nest of nuts,
and with boisterous glee flings the fruit to the ground.

This mode of walking the tree is only practicable where the trunk
declines considerably from the perpendicular. This, however, is almost
always the case; some of the perfectly straight shafts of the trees
leaning at an angle of thirty degrees.

The less active among the men, and many of the children of the valley
have another method of climbing. They take a broad and stout piece of
bark, and secure each end of it to their ankles, so that when the feet
thus confined are extended apart, a space of little more than twelve
inches is left between them. This contrivance greatly facilitates
the act of climbing. The band pressed against the tree, and closely
embracing it, yields a pretty firm support; while with the arms clasped
about the trunk, and at regular intervals sustaining the body, the feet
are drawn up nearly a yard at a time, and a corresponding elevation of
the hands immediately succeeds. In this way I have seen little children,
scarcely five years of age, fearlessly climbing the slender pole of
a young cocoanut tree, and while hanging perhaps fifty feet from the
ground, receiving the plaudits of their parents beneath, who clapped
their hands, and encouraged them to mount still higher.

What, thought I, on first witnessing one of these exhibitions, would
the nervous mothers of America and England say to a similar display of
hardihood in any of their children? The Lacedemonian nation might have
approved of it, but most modern dames would have gone into hysterics at
the sight.

At the top of the cocoanut tree the numerous branches, radiating on
all sides from a common centre, form a sort of green and waving
basket, between the leaflets of which you just discern the nuts thickly
clustering together, and on the loftier trees looking no bigger from
the ground than bunches of grapes. I remember one adventurous little
fellow--Too-Too was the rascal’s name--who had built himself a sort of
aerial baby-house in the picturesque tuft of a tree adjoining Marheyo’s
habitation. He used to spend hours there,--rustling among the branches,
and shouting with delight every time the strong gusts of wind rushing
down from the mountain side, swayed to and fro the tall and flexible
column on which he was perched. Whenever I heard Too-Too’s musical voice
sounding strangely to the ear from so great a height, and beheld him
peeping down upon me from out his leafy covert, he always recalled to my
mind Dibdin’s lines--

    ‘There’s a sweet little cherub that sits up aloft,
     To look out for the life of poor Jack.’

Birds--bright and beautiful birds--fly over the valley of Typee. You
see them perched aloft among the immovable boughs of the majestic
bread-fruit trees, or gently swaying on the elastic branches of the
Omoo; skimming over the palmetto thatching of the bamboo huts; passing
like spirits on the wing through the shadows of the grove, and sometimes
descending into the bosom of the valley in gleaming flights from the
mountains. Their plumage is purple and azure, crimson and white, black
and gold; with bills of every tint: bright bloody red, jet black, and
ivory white, and their eyes are bright and sparkling; they go sailing
through the air in starry throngs; but, alas! the spell of dumbness is
upon them all--there is not a single warbler in the valley!

I know not why it was, but the sight of these birds, generally the
ministers of gladness, always oppressed me with melancholy. As in their
dumb beauty they hovered by me whilst I was walking, or looked down upon
me with steady curious eyes from out the foliage, I was almost inclined
to fancy that they knew they were gazing upon a stranger, and that they
commiserated his fate.




CHAPTER THIRTY

A PROFESSOR OF THE FINE ARTS--HIS PERSECUTIONS--SOMETHING ABOUT
TATTOOING AND TABOOING--TWO ANECDOTES IN ILLUSTRATION OF THE LATTER--A
FEW THOUGHTS ON THE TYPEE DIALECT

In one of my strolls with Kory-Kory, in passing along the border of a
thick growth of bushes, my attention was arrested by a singular noise.
On entering the thicket I witnessed for the first time the operation of
tattooing as performed by these islanders.

I beheld a man extended flat upon his back on the ground, and, despite
the forced composure of his countenance, it was evident that he was
suffering agony. His tormentor bent over him, working away for all the
world like a stone-cutter with mallet and chisel. In one hand he held a
short slender stick, pointed with a shark’s tooth, on the upright end of
which he tapped with a small hammer-like piece of wood, thus puncturing
the skin, and charging it with the colouring matter in which the
instrument was dipped. A cocoanut shell containing this fluid was placed
upon the ground. It is prepared by mixing with a vegetable juice the
ashes of the ‘armor’, or candle-nut, always preserved for the purpose.
Beside the savage, and spread out upon a piece of soiled tappa, were
a great number of curious black-looking little implements of bone and
wood, used in the various divisions of his art. A few terminated in a
single fine point, and, like very delicate pencils, were employed in
giving the finishing touches, or in operating upon the more sensitive
portions of the body, as was the case in the present instance. Others
presented several points distributed in a line, somewhat resembling the
teeth of a saw. These were employed in the coarser parts of the work,
and particularly in pricking in straight marks. Some presented their
points disposed in small figures, and being placed upon the body,
were, by a single blow of the hammer, made to leave their indelible
impression. I observed a few the handles of which were mysteriously
curved, as if intended to be introduced into the orifice of the ear,
with a view perhaps of beating the tattoo upon the tympanum. Altogether
the sight of these strange instruments recalled to mind that display
of cruel-looking mother-of-pearl-handled things which one sees in their
velvet-lined cases at the elbow of a dentist.

The artist was not at this time engaged on an original sketch, his
subject being a venerable savage, whose tattooing had become somewhat
faded with age and needed a few repairs, and accordingly he was merely
employed in touching up the works of some of the old masters of the
Typee school, as delineated upon the human canvas before him. The parts
operated upon were the eyelids, where a longitudinal streak, like the
one which adorned Kory-Kory, crossed the countenance of the victim.

In spite of all the efforts of the poor old man, sundry twitchings and
screwings of the muscles of the face denoted the exquisite sensibility
of these shutters to the windows of his soul, which he was now having
repainted. But the artist, with a heart as callous as that of an army
surgeon, continued his performance, enlivening his labours with a wild
chant, tapping away the while as merrily as a woodpecker.

So deeply engaged was he in his work, that he had not observed our
approach, until, after having, enjoyed an unmolested view of the
operation, I chose to attract his attention. As soon as he perceived me,
supposing that I sought him in his professional capacity, he seized hold
of me in a paroxysm of delight, and was an eagerness to begin the work.
When, however, I gave him to understand that he had altogether mistaken
my views, nothing could exceed his grief and disappointment. But
recovering from this, he seemed determined not to credit my assertion,
and grasping his implements, he flourished them about in fearful
vicinity to my face, going through an imaginary performance of his art,
and every moment bursting into some admiring exclamation at the beauty
of his designs.

Horrified at the bare thought of being rendered hideous for life if the
wretch were to execute his purpose upon me, I struggled to get away
from him, while Kory-Kory, turning traitor, stood by, and besought me
to comply with the outrageous request. On my reiterated refusals the
excited artist got half beside himself, and was overwhelmed with sorrow
at losing so noble an opportunity of distinguishing himself in his
profession.

The idea of engrafting his tattooing upon my white skin filled him
with all a painter’s enthusiasm; again and again he gazed into my
countenance, and every fresh glimpse seemed to add to the vehemence
of his ambition. Not knowing to what extremities he might proceed,
and shuddering at the ruin he might inflict upon my figure-head, I now
endeavoured to draw off his attention from it, and holding out my arm
in a fit of desperation, signed to him to commence operations. But he
rejected the compromise indignantly, and still continued his attack on
my face, as though nothing short of that would satisfy him. When his
forefinger swept across my features, in laying out the borders of those
parallel bands which were to encircle my countenance, the flesh fairly
crawled upon my bones. At last, half wild with terror and indignation, I
succeeded in breaking away from the three savages, and fled towards old
Marheyo’s house, pursued by the indomitable artist, who ran after me,
implements in hand. Kory-Kory, however, at last interfered and drew him
off from the chase.

This incident opened my eyes to a new danger; and I now felt convinced
that in some luckless hour I should be disfigured in such a manner as
never more to have the FACE to return to my countrymen, even should an
opportunity offer.

These apprehensions were greatly increased by the desire which King
Mehevi and several of the inferior chiefs now manifested that I should
be tattooed. The pleasure of the king was first signified to me some
three days after my casual encounter with Karky the artist. Heavens!
what imprecations I showered upon that Karky. Doubtless he had plotted a
conspiracy against me and my countenance, and would never rest until his
diabolical purpose was accomplished. Several times I met him in various
parts of the valley, and, invariably, whenever he descried me, he came
running after me with his mallet and chisel, flourishing them about my
face as if he longed to begin. What an object he would have made of me!

When the king first expressed his wish to me, I made known to him my
utter abhorrence of the measure, and worked myself into such a state of
excitement, that he absolutely stared at me in amazement. It evidently
surpassed his majesty’s comprehension how any sober-minded and
sensible individual could entertain the least possible objection to so
beautifying an operation.

Soon afterwards he repeated his suggestion, and meeting with a little
repulse, showed some symptoms of displeasure at my obduracy. On his a
third time renewing his request, I plainly perceived that something must
be done, or my visage was ruined for ever; I therefore screwed up my
courage to the sticking point, and declared my willingness to have both
arms tattooed from just above the wrist to the shoulder. His majesty was
greatly pleased at the proposition, and I was congratulating myself with
having thus compromised the matter, when he intimated that as a thing of
course my face was first to undergo the operation. I was fairly driven
to despair; nothing but the utter ruin of my ‘face divine’, as the
poets call it, would, I perceived, satisfy the inexorable Mehevi and his
chiefs, or rather, that infernal Karky, for he was at the bottom of it
all.

The only consolation afforded me was a choice of patterns: I was at
perfect liberty to have my face spanned by three horizontal bars, after
the fashion of my serving-man’s; or to have as many oblique stripes
slanting across it; or if, like a true courtier, I chose to model my
style on that of royalty, I might wear a sort of freemason badge upon
my countenance in the shape of a mystic triangle. However, I would have
none of these, though the king most earnestly impressed upon my mind
that my choice was wholly unrestricted. At last, seeing my unconquerable
repugnance, he ceased to importune me.

But not so some other of the savages. Hardly a day passed but I was
subjected to their annoying requests, until at last my existence
became a burden to me; the pleasures I had previously enjoyed no longer
afforded me delight, and all my former desire to escape from the valley
now revived with additional force.

A fact which I soon afterwards learned augmented my apprehension. The
whole system of tattooing was, I found, connected with their religion;
and it was evident, therefore, that they were resolved to make a convert
of me.

In the decoration of the chiefs it seems to be necessary to exercise the
most elaborate pencilling; while some of the inferior natives looked
as if they had been daubed over indiscriminately with a house-painter’s
brush. I remember one fellow who prided himself hugely upon a great
oblong patch, placed high upon his back, and who always reminded me of
a man with a blister of Spanish flies, stuck between his shoulders.
Another whom I frequently met had the hollow of his eyes tattooed in two
regular squares and his visual organs being remarkably brilliant, they
gleamed forth from out this setting like a couple of diamonds inserted
in ebony.

Although convinced that tattooing was a religious observance, still the
nature of the connection between it and the superstitious idolatry of
the people was a point upon which I could never obtain any information.
Like the still more important system of the ‘Taboo’, it always appeared
inexplicable to me.

There is a marked similarity, almost an identity, between the religious
institutions of most of the Polynesian islands, and in all exists the
mysterious ‘Taboo’, restricted in its uses to a greater or less extent.
So strange and complex in its arrangements is this remarkable system,
that I have in several cases met with individuals who, after residing
for years among the islands in the Pacific, and acquiring a considerable
knowledge of the language, have nevertheless been altogether unable to
give any satisfactory account of its operations. Situated as I was
in the Typee valley, I perceived every hour the effects of this
all-controlling power, without in the least comprehending it. Those
effects were, indeed, wide-spread and universal, pervading the most
important as well as the minutest transactions of life. The savage, in
short, lives in the continual observance of its dictates, which guide
and control every action of his being.

For several days after entering the valley I had been saluted at least
fifty times in the twenty-four hours with the talismanic word ‘Taboo’
shrieked in my ears, at some gross violation of its provisions, of which
I had unconsciously been guilty. The day after our arrival I happened to
hand some tobacco to Toby over the head of a native who sat between
us. He started up, as if stung by an adder; while the whole company,
manifesting an equal degree of horror, simultaneously screamed out
‘Taboo!’ I never again perpetrated a similar piece of ill-manners,
which, indeed, was forbidden by the canons of good breeding, as well as
by the mandates of the taboo. But it was not always so easy to perceive
wherein you had contravened the spirit of this institution. I was many
times called to order, if I may use the phrase, when I could not for the
life of me conjecture what particular offence I had committed.

One day I was strolling through a secluded portion of the valley, and
hearing the musical sound of the cloth-mallet at a little distance, I
turned down a path that conducted me in a few moments to a house where
there were some half-dozen girls employed in making tappa. This was an
operation I had frequently witnessed, and had handled the bark in all
the various stages of its preparation. On the present occasion the
females were intent upon their occupation, and after looking up and
talking gaily to me for a few moments, they resumed their employment. I
regarded them for a while in silence, and then carelessly picking up a
handful of the material that lay around, proceeded unconsciously to pick
it apart. While thus engaged, I was suddenly startled by a scream, like
that of a whole boarding-school of young ladies just on the point of
going into hysterics. Leaping up with the idea of seeing a score of
Happar warriors about to perform anew the Sabine atrocity, I found
myself confronted by the company of girls, who, having dropped their
work, stood before me with starting eyes, swelling bosoms, and fingers
pointed in horror towards me.

Thinking that some venomous reptile must be concealed in the bark which
I held in my hand, I began cautiously to separate and examine it. Whilst
I did so the horrified girls re-doubled their shrieks. Their wild cries
and frightened motions actually alarmed me, and throwing down the tappa,
I was about to rush from the house, when in the same instant their
clamours ceased, and one of them, seizing me by the arm, pointed to the
broken fibres that had just fallen from my grasp, and screamed in my
ears the fatal word Taboo!

I subsequently found out that the fabric they were engaged in making was
of a peculiar kind, destined to be worn on the heads of the females, and
through every stage of its manufacture was guarded by a rigorous taboo,
which interdicted the whole masculine gender from even so much as
touching it.

Frequently in walking through the groves I observed bread-fruit and
cocoanut trees, with a wreath of leaves twined in a peculiar fashion
about their trunks. This was the mark of the taboo. The trees
themselves, their fruit, and even the shadows they cast upon the ground,
were consecrated by its presence. In the same way a pipe, which the king
had bestowed upon me, was rendered sacred in the eyes of the natives,
none of whom could I ever prevail upon to smoke from it. The bowl was
encircled by a woven band of grass, somewhat resembling those Turks’
heads occasionally worked in the handles of our whip-stalks.

A similar badge was once braided about my wrist by the royal hand
of Mehevi himself, who, as soon as he had concluded the operation,
pronounced me ‘Taboo’. This occurred shortly after Toby’s disappearance;
and, were it not that from the first moment I had entered the valley
the natives had treated me with uniform kindness, I should have supposed
that their conduct afterwards was to be ascribed to the fact that I had
received this sacred investiture.

The capricious operations of the taboo are not its least remarkable
feature: to enumerate them all would be impossible. Black hogs--infants
to a certain age--women in an interesting situation--young men while the
operation of tattooing their faces is going on--and certain parts of the
valley during the continuance of a shower--are alike fenced about by the
operation of the taboo.

I witnessed a striking instance of its effects in the bay of Tior,
my visit to which place has been alluded to in a former part of this
narrative. On that occasion our worthy captain formed one of the party.
He was a most insatiable sportsman. Outward bound, and off the pitch of
Cape Horn, he used to sit on the taffrail, and keep the steward loading
three or four old fowling pieces, with which he would bring down
albatrosses, Cape pigeons, jays, petrels, and divers other marine fowl,
who followed chattering in our wake. The sailors were struck aghast at
his impiety, and one and all attributed our forty days’ beating about
that horrid headland to his sacrilegious slaughter of these inoffensive
birds.

At Tior he evinced the same disregard for the religious prejudices of
the islanders, as he had previously shown for the superstitions of the
sailors. Having heard that there were a considerable number of fowls in
the valley the progeny of some cocks and hens accidentally left there by
an English vessel, and which, being strictly tabooed, flew about almost
in a wild state--he determined to break through all restraints, and
be the death of them. Accordingly, he provided himself with a most
formidable looking gun, and announced his landing on the beach by
shooting down a noble cock that was crowing what proved to be his own
funeral dirge, on the limb of an adjoining tree. ‘Taboo’, shrieked the
affrighted savages. ‘Oh, hang your taboo,’ says the nautical sportsman;
‘talk taboo to the marines’; and bang went the piece again, and down
came another victim. At this the natives ran scampering through the
groves, horror-struck at the enormity of the act.

All that afternoon the rocky sides of the valley rang with successive
reports, and the superb plumage of many a beautiful fowl was ruffled by
the fatal bullet. Had it not been that the French admiral, with a large
party, was then in the glen, I have no doubt that the natives, although
their tribe was small and dispirited, would have inflicted summary
vengeance upon the man who thus outraged their most sacred institutions;
as it was, they contrived to annoy him not a little.

Thirsting with his exertions, the skipper directed his steps to
a stream; but the savages, who had followed at a little distance,
perceiving his object, rushed towards him and forced him away from its
bank--his lips would have polluted it. Wearied at last, he sought to
enter a house that he might rest for a while on the mats; its inmates
gathered tumultuously about the door and denied him admittance. He
coaxed and blustered by turns, but in vain; the natives were neither
to be intimidated nor appeased, and as a final resort he was obliged
to call together his boat’s crew, and pull away from what he termed the
most infernal place he ever stepped upon.

Lucky was it for him and for us that we were not honoured on our
departure by a salute of stones from the hands of the exasperated Tiors.
In this way, on the neighbouring island of Ropo, were killed, but a few
weeks previously, and for a nearly similar offence, the master and three
of the crew of the K---.

I cannot determine with anything approaching to certainty, what power
it is that imposes the taboo. When I consider the slight disparity
of condition among the islanders--the very limited and inconsiderable
prerogatives of the king and chiefs--and the loose and indefinite
functions of the priesthood, most of whom were hardly to be
distinguished from the rest of their countrymen, I am wholly at a loss
where to look for the authority which regulates this potent institution.
It is imposed upon something today, and withdrawn tomorrow; while its
operations in other cases are perpetual. Sometimes its restrictions only
affect a single individual--sometimes a particular family--sometimes
a whole tribe; and in a few instances they extend not merely over the
various clans on a single island, but over all the inhabitants of an
entire group. In illustration of this latter peculiarity, I may cite
the law which forbids a female to enter a canoe--a prohibition which
prevails upon all the northern Marquesas Islands.

The word itself (taboo) is used in more than one signification. It
is sometimes used by a parent to his child, when in the exercise
of parental authority he forbids it to perform a particular action.
Anything opposed to the ordinary customs of the islanders, although not
expressly prohibited, is said to be ‘taboo’.

The Typee language is one very difficult to be acquired; it bears a
close resemblance to the other Polynesian dialects, all of which show a
common origin. The duplication of words, as ‘lumee lumee’, ‘poee poee’,
‘muee muee’, is one of their peculiar features. But another, and a more
annoying one, is the different senses in which one and the same word is
employed; its various meanings all have a certain connection, which
only makes the matter more puzzling. So one brisk, lively little word
is obliged, like a servant in a poor family, to perform all sorts of
duties; for instance, one particular combination of syllables expresses
the ideas of sleep, rest, reclining, sitting, leaning, and all other
things anywise analogous thereto, the particular meaning being shown
chiefly by a variety of gestures and the eloquent expression of the
countenance.

The intricacy of these dialects is another peculiarity. In the
Missionary College at Lahainaluna, on Mowee, one of the Sandwich
Islands, I saw a tabular exhibition of a Hawiian verb, conjugated
through all its moods and tenses. It covered the side of a considerable
apartment, and I doubt whether Sir William Jones himself would not have
despaired of mastering it.




CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

STRANGE CUSTOM OF THE ISLANDERS--THEIR CHANTING, AND THE PECULIARITY OF
THEIR VOICE--RAPTURE OF THE KING AT FIRST HEARING A SONG--A NEW DIGNITY
CONFERRED ON THE AUTHOR--MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS IN THE VALLEY--ADMIRATION
OF THE SAVAGES AT BEHOLDING A PUGILISTIC PERFORMANCE--SWIMMING
INFANT--BEAUTIFUL TRESSES OF THE GIRLS--OINTMENT FOR THE HAIR

Sadly discursive as I have already been, I must still further entreat
the reader’s patience, as I am about to string together, without any
attempt at order, a few odds and ends of things not hitherto mentioned,
but which are either curious in themselves or peculiar to the Typees.

There was one singular custom observed in old Marheyo’s domestic
establishment, which often excited my surprise. Every night, before
retiring, the inmates of the house gathered together on the mats, and
so squatting upon their haunches, after the universal practice of
these islanders, would commence a low, dismal and monotonous chant,
accompanying the voice with the instrumental melody produced by two
small half-rotten sticks tapped slowly together, a pair of which
were held in the hands of each person present. Thus would they employ
themselves for an hour or two, sometimes longer. Lying in the gloom
which wrapped the further end of the house, I could not avoid looking
at them, although the spectacle suggested nothing but unpleasant
reflection. The flickering rays of the ‘armor’ nut just served to reveal
their savage lineaments, without dispelling the darkness that hovered
about them.

Sometimes when, after falling into a kind of doze, and awaking suddenly
in the midst of these doleful chantings, my eye would fall upon the
wild-looking group engaged in their strange occupation, with their naked
tattooed limbs, and shaven heads disposed in a circle, I was almost
tempted to believe that I gazed upon a set of evil beings in the act of
working at a frightful incantation.

What was the meaning or purpose of this custom, whether it was practiced
merely as a diversion, or whether it was a religious exercise, a sort of
family prayers, I never could discover.

The sounds produced by the natives on these occasions were of a most
singular description; and had I not actually been present, I never would
have believed that such curious noises could have been produced by human
beings.

To savages generally is imputed a guttural articulation. This however,
is not always the case, especially among the inhabitants of the
Polynesian Archipelago. The labial melody with which the Typee girls
carry on an ordinary conversation, giving a musical prolongation to the
final syllable of every sentence, and chirping out some of the words
with a liquid, bird-like accent, was singularly pleasing.

The men however, are not quite so harmonious in their utterance, and
when excited upon any subject, would work themselves up into a sort of
wordy paroxysm, during which all descriptions of rough-sided sounds
were projected from their mouths, with a force and rapidity which was
absolutely astonishing.

      . . . . .  .  .  .

Although these savages are remarkably fond of chanting, still they
appear to have no idea whatever of singing, at least as the art is
practised in other nations.

I shall never forget the first time I happened to roar out a stave
in the presence of noble Mehevi. It was a stanza from the ‘Bavarian
broom-seller’. His Typeean majesty, with all his court, gazed upon me in
amazement, as if I had displayed some preternatural faculty which Heaven
had denied to them. The King was delighted with the verse; but the
chorus fairly transported him. At his solicitation I sang it again and
again, and nothing could be more ludicrous than his vain attempts to
catch the air and the words. The royal savage seemed to think that by
screwing all the features of his face into the end of his nose he
might possibly succeed in the undertaking, but it failed to answer the
purpose; and in the end he gave it up, and consoled himself by listening
to my repetition of the sounds fifty times over.

Previous to Mehevi’s making the discovery, I had never been aware that
there was anything of the nightingale about me; but I was now promoted
to the place of court-minstrel, in which capacity I was afterwards
perpetually called upon to officiate.

      . . . . .  .  .  .

Besides the sticks and the drums, there are no other musical instruments
among the Typees, except one which might appropriately be denominated a
nasal flute. It is somewhat longer than an ordinary fife; is made of
a beautiful scarlet-coloured reed; and has four or five stops, with
a large hole near one end, which latter is held just beneath the left
nostril. The other nostril being closed by a peculiar movement of the
muscles about the nose, the breath is forced into the tube, and produces
a soft dulcet sound which is varied by the fingers running at random
over the stops. This is a favourite recreation with the females and one
in which Fayaway greatly excelled. Awkward as such an instrument may
appear, it was, in Fayaway’s delicate little hands, one of the most
graceful I have ever seen. A young lady, in the act of tormenting a
guitar strung about her neck by a couple of yards of blue ribbon, is not
half so engaging.

      . . . . .  .  .  .

Singing was not the only means I possessed of diverting the royal Mehevi
and his easy-going subject. Nothing afforded them more pleasure than to
see me go through the attitude of pugilistic encounter. As not one of
the natives had soul enough in him to stand up like a man, and allow me
to hammer away at him, for my own personal gratification and that of
the king, I was necessitated to fight with an imaginary enemy, whom I
invariably made to knock under to my superior prowess. Sometimes when
this sorely battered shadow retreated precipitately towards a group of
the savages, and, following him up, I rushed among them dealing my
blows right and left, they would disperse in all directions much to the
enjoyment of Mehevi, the chiefs, and themselves.

The noble art of self-defence appeared to be regarded by them as the
peculiar gift of the white man; and I make little doubt that they
supposed armies of Europeans were drawn up provided with nothing else
but bony fists and stout hearts, with which they set to in column, and
pummelled one another at the word of command.

      . . . . .  .  .  .

One day, in company with Kory-Kory, I had repaired to the stream for the
purpose of bathing, when I observed a woman sitting upon a rock in
the midst of the current, and watching with the liveliest interest the
gambols of something, which at first I took to be an uncommonly large
species of frog that was sporting in the water near her. Attracted by
the novelty of the sight, I waded towards the spot where she sat, and
could hardly credit the evidence of my senses when I beheld a little
infant, the period of whose birth could not have extended back many
days, paddling about as if it had just risen to the surface, after being
hatched into existence at the bottom. Occasionally, the delighted parent
reached out her hand towards it, when the little thing, uttering a faint
cry, and striking out its tiny limbs, would sidle for the rock, and the
next moment be clasped to its mother’s bosom. This was repeated again
and again, the baby remaining in the stream about a minute at a time.
Once or twice it made wry faces at swallowing a mouthful of water, and
choked a spluttered as if on the point of strangling. At such times
however, the mother snatched it up and by a process scarcely to be
mentioned obliged it to eject the fluid. For several weeks afterwards
I observed this woman bringing her child down to the stream regularly
every day, in the cool of the morning and evening and treating it to a
bath. No wonder that the South Sea Islanders are so amphibious a race,
when they are thus launched into the water as soon as they see the
light. I am convinced that it is as natural for a human being to swim as
it is for a duck. And yet in civilized communities how many able-bodied
individuals die, like so many drowning kittens, from the occurrence of
the most trivial accidents!

       . . . . .  .  .  .

The long luxuriant and glossy tresses of the Typee damsels often
attracted my admiration. A fine head of hair is the pride and joy of
every woman’s heart. Whether against the express will of Providence, it
is twisted upon the crown of the head and there coiled away like a rope
on a ship’s deck; whether it be stuck behind the ears and hangs down
like the swag of a small window-curtain; or whether it be permitted to
flow over the shoulders in natural ringlets, it is always the pride of
the owner, and the glory of the toilette.

The Typee girls devote much of their time to the dressing of their fair
and redundant locks. After bathing, as they sometimes do five or six
times every day, the hair is carefully dried, and if they have been in
the sea, invariably washed in fresh water, and anointed with a highly
scented oil extracted from the meat of the cocoanut. This oil is
obtained in great abundance by the following very simple process:

A large vessel of wood, with holes perforated in the bottom, is filled
with the pounded meat, and exposed to the rays of the sun. As the
oleaginous matter exudes, it falls in drops through the apertures into a
wide-mouthed calabash placed underneath. After a sufficient quantity has
thus been collected, the oil undergoes a purifying process, and is then
poured into the small spherical shells of the nuts of the moo-tree,
which are hollowed out to receive it. These nuts are then hermetically
sealed with a resinous gum, and the vegetable fragrance of their green
rind soon imparts to the oil a delightful odour. After the lapse of a
few weeks the exterior shell of the nuts becomes quite dry and hard, and
assumes a beautiful carnation tint; and when opened they are found to
be about two-thirds full of an ointment of a light yellow colour and
diffusing the sweetest perfume. This elegant little odorous globe would
not be out of place even upon the toilette of a queen. Its merits as a
preparation for the hair are undeniable--it imparts to it a superb gloss
and a silky fineness.




CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

APPREHENSIONS OF EVIL--FRIGHTFUL DISCOVERY--SOME REMARKS
ON CANNIBALISM--SECOND BATTLE WITH THE HAPPARS--SAVAGE
SPECTACLE--MYSTERIOUS FEAST--SUBSEQUENT DISCLOSURES


From the time of my casual encounter with Karky the artist, my life was
one of absolute wretchedness. Not a day passed but I was persecuted by
the solicitations of some of the natives to subject myself to the odious
operation of tattooing. Their importunities drove me half wild, for I
felt how easily they might work their will upon me regarding this or
anything else which they took into their heads. Still, however, the
behaviour of the islanders towards me was as kind as ever. Fayaway was
quite as engaging; Kory-Kory as devoted; and Mehevi the king just as
gracious and condescending as before. But I had now been three months in
their valley, as nearly as I could estimate; I had grown familiar with
the narrow limits to which my wandering had been confined; and I began
bitterly to feel the state of captivity in which I was held. There
was no one with whom I could freely converse; no one to whom I could
communicate my thoughts; no one who could sympathize with my sufferings.
A thousand times I thought how much more endurable would have been my
lot had Toby still been with me. But I was left alone, and the thought
was terrible to me. Still, despite my griefs, I did all in my power
to appear composed and cheerful, well knowing that by manifesting any
uneasiness, or any desire to escape, I should only frustrate my object.

It was during the period I was in this unhappy frame of mind that the
painful malady under which I had been labouring--after having almost
completely subsided--began again to show itself, and with symptoms as
violent as ever. This added calamity nearly unmanned me; the recurrence
of the complaint proved that without powerful remedial applications
all hope of cure was futile; and when I reflected that just beyond the
elevations, which bound me in, was the medical relief I needed, and that
although so near, it was impossible for me to avail myself of it, the
thought was misery.

In this wretched situation, every circumstance which evinced the
savage nature of the beings at whose mercy I was, augmented the fearful
apprehensions that consumed me. An occurrence which happened about this
time affected me most powerfully.

I have already mentioned that from the ridge-pole of Marheyo’s house
were suspended a number of packages enveloped in tappa. Many of these I
had often seen in the hands of the natives, and their contents had been
examined in my presence. But there were three packages hanging
very nearly over the place where I lay, which from their remarkable
appearance had often excited my curiosity. Several times I had asked
Kory-Kory to show me their contents, but my servitor, who, in almost
every other particular had acceded to my wishes, refused to gratify me
in this.

One day, returning unexpectedly from the ‘Ti’, my arrival seemed to
throw the inmates of the house into the greatest confusion. They were
seated together on the mats, and by the lines which extended from the
roof to the floor I immediately perceived that the mysterious packages
were for some purpose or another under inspection. The evident alarm
the savages betrayed filled me with forebodings of evil, and with an
uncontrollable desire to penetrate the secret so jealously guarded.
Despite the efforts of Marheyo and Kory-Kory to restrain me, I forced
my way into the midst of the circle, and just caught a glimpse of three
human heads, which others of the party were hurriedly enveloping in the
coverings from which they had been taken.

One of the three I distinctly saw. It was in a state of perfect
preservation, and from the slight glimpse I had of it, seemed to have
been subjected to some smoking operation which had reduced it to the
dry, hard, and mummy-like appearance it presented. The two long scalp
locks were twisted up into balls upon the crown of the head in the same
way that the individual had worn them during life. The sunken cheeks
were rendered yet more ghastly by the rows of glistening teeth which
protruded from between the lips, while the sockets of the eyes--filled
with oval bits of mother-of-pearl shell, with a black spot in the
centre--heightened the hideousness of its aspect.

Two of the three were heads of the islanders; but the third, to my
horror, was that of a white man. Although it had been quickly removed
from my sight, still the glimpse I had of it was enough to convince me
that I could not be mistaken.

Gracious God! what dreadful thoughts entered my head; in solving this
mystery perhaps I had solved another, and the fate of my lost companion
might be revealed in the shocking spectacle I had just witnessed. I
longed to have torn off the folds of cloth and satisfied the awful
doubts under which I laboured. But before I had recovered from the
consternation into which I had been thrown, the fatal packages were
hoisted aloft, and once more swung over my head. The natives now
gathered round me tumultuously, and laboured to convince me that what
I had just seen were the heads of three Happar warriors, who had been
slain in battle. This glaring falsehood added to my alarm, and it was
not until I reflected that I had observed the packages swinging from
their elevation before Toby’s disappearance, that I could at all recover
my composure.

But although this horrible apprehension had been dispelled, I had
discovered enough to fill me, in my present state of mind, with the most
bitter reflections. It was plain that I had seen the last relic of some
unfortunate wretch, who must have been massacred on the beach by the
savages, in one of those perilous trading adventures which I have before
described.

It was not, however, alone the murder of the stranger that overcame me
with gloom. I shuddered at the idea of the subsequent fate his inanimate
body might have met with. Was the same doom reserved for me? Was I
destined to perish like him--like him perhaps, to be devoured and my
head to be preserved as a fearful memento of the events? My imagination
ran riot in these horrid speculations, and I felt certain that the
worst possible evils would befall me. But whatever were my misgivings, I
studiously concealed them from the islanders, as well as the full extent
of the discovery I had made.

Although the assurances which the Typees had often given me, that they
never eat human flesh, had not convinced me that such was the case, yet,
having been so long a time in the valley without witnessing anything
which indicated the existence of the practice, I began to hope that it
was an event of very rare occurrence, and that I should be spared the
horror of witnessing it during my stay among them: but, alas, these
hopes were soon destroyed.

It is a singular fact, that in all our accounts of cannibal tribes we
have seldom received the testimony of an eye-witness account to this
revolting practice. The horrible conclusion has almost always been
derived from the second-hand evidence of Europeans, or else from the
admissions of the savages themselves, after they have in some degree
become civilized. The Polynesians are aware of the detestation in which
Europeans hold this custom, and therefore invariably deny its existence,
and with the craft peculiar to savages, endeavour to conceal every trace
of it.

The excessive unwillingness betrayed by the Sandwich Islanders, even at
the present day, to allude to the unhappy fate of Cook, has often been
remarked. And so well have they succeeded in covering the event with
mystery, that to this very hour, despite all that has been said and
written on the subject, it still remains doubtful whether they wreaked
upon his murdered body the vengeance they sometimes inflicted upon their
enemies.

At Kealakekau, the scene of that tragedy, a strip of ship’s copper
nailed against an upright post in the ground used to inform
the traveller that beneath reposed the ‘remains’ of the great
circumnavigator. But I am strongly inclined to believe not only the
corpse was refused Christian burial, but that the heart which was
brought to Vancouver some time after the event, and which the Hawaiians
stoutly maintained was that of Captain Cook, was no such thing; and that
the whole affair was a piece of imposture which was sought to be palmed
off upon the credulous Englishman.

A few years since there was living on the island of Maui (one of the
Sandwich group) an old chief, who, actuated by a morbid desire for
notoriety, gave himself out among the foreign residents of the place
as the living tomb of Captain Cook’s big toe!--affirming that at the
cannibal entertainment which ensued after the lamented Briton’s death,
that particular portion of his body had fallen to his share. His
indignant countrymen actually caused him to be prosecuted in the native
courts, on a charge nearly equivalent to what we term defamation of
character; but the old fellow persisting in his assertion, and no
invalidating proof being adduced, the plaintiffs were cast in the suit,
and the cannibal reputation of the defendant firmly established. This
result was the making of his fortune; ever afterwards he was in the
habit of giving very profitable audiences to all curious travellers who
were desirous of beholding the man who had eaten the great navigator’s
great toe.

About a week after my discovery of the contents of the mysterious
packages, I happened to be at the Ti, when another war-alarm was
sounded, and the natives rushing to their arms, sallied out to resist
a second incursion of the Happar invaders. The same scene was again
repeated, only that on this occasion I heard at least fifteen reports of
muskets from the mountains during the time that the skirmish lasted.
An hour or two after its termination, loud paeans chanted through the
valley announced the approach of the victors. I stood with Kory-Kory
leaning against the railing of the pi-pi awaiting their advance, when
a tumultuous crowd of islanders emerged with wild clamours from
the neighbouring groves. In the midst of them marched four men, one
preceding the other at regular intervals of eight or ten feet, with
poles of a corresponding length, extending from shoulder to shoulder,
to which were lashed with thongs of bark three long narrow bundles,
carefully wrapped in ample coverings of freshly plucked palm-leaves,
tacked together with slivers of bamboo. Here and there upon these green
winding-sheets might be seen the stains of blood, while the warriors who
carried the frightful burdens displayed upon their naked limbs similar
sanguinary marks. The shaven head of the foremost had a deep gash upon
it, and the clotted gore which had flowed from the wound remained in dry
patches around it. The savage seemed to be sinking under the weight
he bore. The bright tattooing upon his body was covered with blood
and dust; his inflamed eyes rolled in their sockets, and his whole
appearance denoted extraordinary suffering and exertion; yet sustained
by some powerful impulse, he continued to advance, while the throng
around him with wild cheers sought to encourage him. The other three men
were marked about the arms and breasts with several slight wounds, which
they somewhat ostentatiously displayed.

These four individuals, having been the most active in the late
encounter, claimed the honour of bearing the bodies of their slain
enemies to the Ti. Such was the conclusion I drew from my own
observations, and, as far as I could understand, from the explanation
which Kory-Kory gave me.

The royal Mehevi walked by the side of these heroes. He carried in one
hand a musket, from the barrel of which was suspended a small canvas
pouch of powder, and in the other he grasped a short javelin, which he
held before him and regarded with fierce exultation. This javelin he had
wrested from a celebrated champion of the Happars, who had ignominiously
fled, and was pursued by his foes beyond the summit of the mountain.

When within a short distance of the Ti, the warrior with the wounded
head, who proved to be Narmonee, tottered forward two or three steps,
and fell helplessly to the ground; but not before another had caught the
end of the pole from his shoulder, and placed it upon his own.

The excited throng of islanders, who surrounded the person of the king
and the dead bodies of the enemy, approached the spot where I stood,
brandishing their rude implements of warfare, many of which were bruised
and broken, and uttering continual shouts of triumph. When the crowd
drew up opposite the Ti, I set myself to watch their proceedings most
attentively; but scarcely had they halted when my servitor, who had left
my side for an instant, touched my arm and proposed our returning to
Marheyo’s house. To this I objected; but, to my surprise, Kory-Kory
reiterated his request, and with an unusual vehemence of manner. Still,
however, I refused to comply, and was retreating before him, as in his
importunity he pressed upon me, when I felt a heavy hand laid upon my
shoulder, and turning round, encountered the bulky form of Mow-Mow, a
one-eyed chief, who had just detached himself from the crowd below, and
had mounted the rear of the pi-pi upon which we stood. His cheek had
been pierced by the point of a spear, and the wound imparted a still
more frightful expression to his hideously tattooed face, already
deformed by the loss of an eye. The warrior, without uttering a
syllable, pointed fiercely in the direction of Marheyo’s house, while
Kory-Kory, at the same time presenting his back, desired me to mount.

I declined this offer, but intimated my willingness to withdraw, and
moved slowly along the piazza, wondering what could be the cause of this
unusual treatment. A few minutes’ consideration convinced me that the
savages were about to celebrate some hideous rite in connection with
their peculiar customs, and at which they were determined I should not
be present. I descended from the pi-pi, and attended by Kory-Kory, who
on this occasion did not show his usual commiseration for my lameness,
but seemed only anxious to hurry me on, walked away from the place. As I
passed through the noisy throng, which by this time completely environed
the Ti, I looked with fearful curiosity at the three packages, which now
were deposited upon the ground; but although I had no doubt as to their
contents, still their thick coverings prevented my actually detecting
the form of a human body.

The next morning, shortly after sunrise, the same thundering sounds
which had awakened me from sleep on the second day of the Feast of
Calabashes, assured me that the savages were on the eve of celebrating
another, and, as I fully believed, a horrible solemnity.

All the inmates of the house, with the exception of Marheyo, his son,
and Tinor, after assuming their gala dresses, departed in the direction
of the Taboo Groves.

Although I did not anticipate a compliance with my request, still, with
a view of testing the truth of my suspicions, I proposed to Kory-Kory
that, according to our usual custom in the morning, we should take a
stroll to the Ti: he positively refused; and when I renewed the request,
he evinced his determination to prevent my going there; and, to divert
my mind from the subject, he offered to accompany me to the stream. We
accordingly went, and bathed. On our coming back to the house, I was
surprised to find that all its inmates had returned, and were lounging
upon the mats as usual, although the drums still sounded from the
groves.

The rest of the day I spent with Kory-Kory and Fayaway, wandering about
a part of the valley situated in an opposite direction from the Ti,
and whenever I so much as looked towards that building, although it was
hidden from view by intervening trees, and at the distance of more than
a mile, my attendant would exclaim, ‘Taboo, taboo!’

At the various houses where we stopped, I found many of the inhabitants
reclining at their ease, or pursuing some light occupation, as if
nothing unusual were going forward; but amongst them all I did not
perceive a single chief or warrior. When I asked several of the people
why they were not at the ‘Hoolah Hoolah’ (the feast), their uniformly
answered the question in a manner which implied that it was not intended
for them, but for Mehevi, Narmonee, Mow-Mow, Kolor, Womonoo, Kalow,
running over, in their desire to make me comprehend their meaning, the
names of all the principal chiefs.

Everything, in short, strengthened my suspicions with regard to the
nature of the festival they were now celebrating; and which amounted
almost to a certainty. While in Nukuheva I had frequently been informed
that the whole tribe were never present at these cannibal banquets, but
the chiefs and priests only; and everything I now observed agreed with
the account.

The sound of the drums continued without intermission the whole day, and
falling continually upon my ear, caused me a sensation of horror which I
am unable to describe. On the following day, hearing none of those
noisy indications of revelry, I concluded that the inhuman feast was
terminated; and feeling a kind of morbid curiosity to discover whether
the Ti might furnish any evidence of what had taken place there, I
proposed to Kory-Kory to walk there. To this proposition he replied
by pointing with his finger to the newly risen sun, and then up to the
zenith, intimating that our visit must be deferred until noon. Shortly
after that hour we accordingly proceeded to the Taboo Groves, and as
soon as we entered their precincts, I looked fearfully round in, quest
of some memorial of the scene which had so lately been acted there; but
everything appeared as usual. On reaching the Ti, we found Mehevi and a
few chiefs reclining on the mats, who gave me as friendly a reception as
ever. No allusions of any kind were made by them to the recent events;
and I refrained, for obvious reasons, from referring to them myself.

After staying a short time I took my leave. In passing along the piazza,
previously to descending from the pi-pi, I observed a curiously carved
vessel of wood, of considerable size, with a cover placed over it, of
the same material, and which resembled in shape a small canoe. It was
surrounded by a low railing of bamboos, the top of which was scarcely
a foot from the ground. As the vessel had been placed in its present
position since my last visit, I at once concluded that it must have
some connection with the recent festival, and, prompted by a curiosity
I could not repress, in passing it I raised one end of the cover; at the
same moment the chiefs, perceiving my design, loudly ejaculated, ‘Taboo!
taboo!’

But the slight glimpse sufficed; my eyes fell upon the disordered
members of a human skeleton, the bones still fresh with moisture, and
with particles of flesh clinging to them here and there!

Kory-Kory, who had been a little in advance of me, attracted by
the exclamations of the chiefs, turned round in time to witness the
expression of horror on my countenance. He now hurried towards me,
pointing at the same time to the canoe, and exclaiming rapidly,
‘Puarkee! puarkee!’ (Pig, pig). I pretended to yield to the deception,
and repeated the words after him several times, as though acquiescing
in what he said. The other savages, either deceived by my conduct
or unwilling to manifest their displeasure at what could not now be
remedied, took no further notice of the occurrence, and I immediately
left the Ti.

All that night I lay awake, revolving in my mind the fearful situation
in which I was placed. The last horrid revelation had now been made, and
the full sense of my condition rushed upon my mind with a force I had
never before experienced.

Where, thought I, desponding, is there the slightest prospect of escape?
The only person who seemed to possess the ability to assist me was the
stranger Marnoo; but would he ever return to the valley? and if he did,
should I be permitted to hold any communication with him? It seemed as
if I were cut off from every source of hope, and that nothing remained
but passively to await whatever fate was in store for me. A thousand
times I endeavoured to account for the mysterious conduct of the
natives.

For what conceivable purpose did they thus retain me a captive? What
could be their object in treating me with such apparent kindness, and
did it not cover some treacherous scheme? Or, if they had no other
design than to hold me a prisoner, how should I be able to pass away my
days in this narrow valley, deprived of all intercourse with civilized
beings, and for ever separated from friends and home?

One only hope remained to me. The French could not long defer a visit
to the bay, and if they should permanently locate any of their troops
in the valley, the savages could not for any length of time conceal my
existence from them. But what reason had I to suppose that I should be
spared until such an event occurred, an event which might be postponed
by a hundred different contingencies?




CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

THE STRANGER AGAIN ARRIVES IN THE VALLEY--SINGULAR INTERVIEW WITH
HIM--ATTEMPT TO ESCAPE--FAILURE--MELANCHOLY SITUATION--SYMPATHY OF
MARHEYO


‘Marnoo, Marnoo pemi!’ Such were the welcome sounds which fell upon my
ear some ten days after the events related in the preceding chapter.
Once more the approach of the stranger was heralded, and the
intelligence operated upon me like magic. Again I should be able to
converse with him in my own language; and I resolve at all hazards to
concert with him some scheme, however desperate, to rescue me from a
condition that had now become insupportable.

As he drew near, I remembered with many misgivings the inauspicious
termination of our former interview, and when he entered the house, I
watched with intense anxiety the reception he met with from its inmates.
To my joy, his appearance was hailed with the liveliest pleasure; and
accosting me kindly, he seated himself by my side, and entered into
conversation with the natives around him. It soon appeared however,
that on this occasion he had not any intelligence of importance to
communicate. I inquired of him from whence he had just come? He replied
from Pueearka, his native valley, and that he intended to return to it
the same day.

At once it struck me that, could I but reach that valley under his
protection, I might easily from thence reach Nukuheva by water; and
animated by the prospect which this plan held, out I disclosed it in
a few brief words to the stranger, and asked him how it could be best
accomplished. My heart sunk within me, when in his broken English he
answered me that it could never be effected. ‘Kanaka no let you go
nowhere,’ he said; ‘you taboo. Why you no like to stay? Plenty moee-moee
(sleep)--plenty ki-ki (eat)--plenty wahenee (young girls)--Oh, very good
place Typee! Suppose you no like this bay, why you come? You no hear
about Typee? All white men afraid Typee, so no white men come.’

These words distressed me beyond belief; and when I had again related to
him the circumstances under which I had descended into the valley, and
sought to enlist his sympathies in my behalf by appealing to the bodily
misery I had endure, he listened with impatience, and cut me short by
exclaiming passionately, ‘Me no hear you talk any more; by by Kanaka
get mad, kill you and me too. No you see he no want you to speak at
all?--you see--ah! by by you no mind--you get well, he kill you, eat
you, hang you head up there, like Happar Kanaka.--Now you listen--but no
talk any more. By by I go;--you see way I go--Ah! then some night Kanaka
all moee-moee (sleep)--you run away, you come Pueearka. I speak Pueearka
Kanaka--he no harm you--ah! then I take you my canoe Nukuheva--and you
run away ship no more.’ With these words, enforced by a vehemence of
gesture I cannot describe, Marnoo started from my side, and immediately
engaged in conversation with some of the chiefs who had entered the
house.

It would have been idle for me to have attempted resuming the interview
so peremptorily terminated by Marnoo, who was evidently little disposed
to compromise his own safety by any rash endeavour to ensure mine.
But the plan he had suggested struck me as one which might possibly be
accomplished, and I resolved to act upon it as speedily as possible.

Accordingly, when he arose to depart, I accompanied him with the natives
outside of the house, with a view of carefully noting the path he
would take in leaving the valley. Just before leaping from the pi-pi he
clasped my hand, and looking significantly at me, exclaimed, ‘Now you
see--you do what I tell you--ah! then you do good;--you no do so--ah!
then you die.’ The next moment he waved his spear to the islanders, and
following the route that conducted to a defile in the mountains lying
opposite the Happar side, was soon out of sight.

A mode of escape was now presented to me, but how was I to avail myself
of it? I was continually surrounded by the savages; I could not stir
from one house to another without being attended by some of them; and
even during the hours devoted to slumber, the slightest movement which I
made seemed to attract the notice of those who shared the mats with me.
In spite of these obstacles, however, I determined forthwith to make the
attempt. To do so with any prospect of success, it was necessary that
I should have at least two hours start before the islanders should
discover my absence; for with such facility was any alarm spread through
the valley, and so familiar, of course, were the inhabitants with the
intricacies of the groves, that I could not hope, lame and feeble as I
was, and ignorant of the route, to secure my escape unless I had this
advantage. It was also by night alone that I could hope to accomplish my
object, and then only by adopting the utmost precaution.

The entrance to Marheyo’s habitation was through a low narrow opening
in its wicker-work front. This passage, for no conceivable reason that I
could devise, was always closed after the household had retired to rest,
by drawing a heavy slide across it, composed of a dozen or more bits of
wood, ingeniously fastened together by seizings of sinnate. When any of
the inmates chose to go outside, the noise occasioned by the removing of
this rude door awakened every body else; and on more than one occasion
I had remarked that the islanders were nearly as irritable as more
civilized beings under similar circumstances.

The difficulty thus placed in my way I, determined to obviate in the
following manner. I would get up boldly in the course of the night, and
drawing the slide, issue from the house, and pretend that my object was
merely to procure a drink from the calabash, which always stood
without the dwelling on the corner of the pi-pi. On re-entering I would
purposely omit closing the passage after me, and trusting that the
indolence of the savages would prevent them from repairing my neglect,
would return to my mat, and waiting patiently until all were again
asleep, I would then steal forth, and at once take the route to
Pueearka.

The very night which followed Marnoo’s departure, I proceeded to put
this project into execution. About midnight, as I imagined, I arose and
drew the slide. The natives, just as I had expected, started up, while
some of them asked, ‘Arware poo awa, Tommo?’ (where are you going,
Tommo?) ‘Wai’ (water) I laconically answered, grasping the calabash. On
hearing my reply they sank back again, and in a minute or two I returned
to my mat, anxiously awaiting the result of the experiment.

One after another the savages, turning restlessly, appeared to resume
their slumbers, and rejoicing at the stillness which prevailed, I was
about to rise again from my couch, when I heard a slight rustling--a
dark form was intercepted between me and the doorway--the slide was
drawn across it, and the individual, whoever he was, returned to
his mat. This was a sad blow to me; but as it might have aroused the
suspicions of the islanders to have made another attempt that night, I
was reluctantly obliged to defer it until the next. Several times after
I repeated the same manoeuvre, but with as little success as before.
As my pretence for withdrawing from the house was to allay my thirst,
Kory-Kory either suspecting some design on my part, or else prompted
by a desire to please me, regularly every evening placed a calabash of
water by my side.

Even, under these inauspicious circumstances I again and again renewed
the attempt, but when I did so, my valet always rose with me, as if
determined I should not remove myself from his observation. For
the present, therefore, I was obliged to abandon the attempt; but I
endeavoured to console myself with the idea that by this mode I might
yet effect my escape.

Shortly after Marnoo’s visit I was reduced to such a state that it was
with extreme difficulty I could walk, even with the assistance of a
spear, and Kory-Kory, as formerly, was obliged to carry me daily to the
stream.

For hours and hours during the warmest part of the day I lay upon my
mat, and while those around me were nearly all dozing away in careless
ease, I remained awake, gloomily pondering over the fate which it
appeared now idle for me to resist, when I thought of the loved friends
who were thousands and thousands of miles from the savage island in
which I was held a captive, when I reflected that my dreadful fate would
for ever be concealed from them, and that with hope deferred they might
continue to await my return long after my inanimate form had blended
with the dust of the valley--I could not repress a shudder of anguish.

How vividly is impressed upon my mind every minute feature of the scene
which met my view during those long days of suffering and sorrow. At my
request my mats were always spread directly facing the door, opposite
which, and at a little distance, was the hut of boughs that Marheyo was
building.

Whenever my gentle Fayaway and Kory-Kory, laying themselves down beside
me, would leave me awhile to uninterrupted repose, I took a strange
interest in the slightest movements of the eccentric old warrior. All
alone during the stillness of the tropical mid-day, he would pursue his
quiet work, sitting in the shade and weaving together the leaflets of
his cocoanut branches, or rolling upon his knee the twisted fibres of
bark to form the cords with which he tied together the thatching of
his tiny house. Frequently suspending his employment, and noticing my
melancholy eye fixed upon him, he would raise his hand with a gesture
expressive of deep commiseration, and then moving towards me slowly,
would enter on tip-toes, fearful of disturbing the slumbering natives,
and, taking the fan from my hand, would sit before me, swaying it gently
to and fro, and gazing earnestly into my face.

Just beyond the pi-pi, and disposed in a triangle before the entrance
of the house, were three magnificent bread-fruit trees. At this moment I
can recap to my mind their slender shafts, and the graceful inequalities
of their bark, on which my eye was accustomed to dwell day after day in
the midst of my solitary musings. It is strange how inanimate objects
will twine themselves into our affections, especially in the hour of
affliction. Even now, amidst all the bustle and stir of the proud and
busy city in which I am dwelling, the image of those three trees seems
to come as vividly before my eyes as if they were actually present, and
I still feel the soothing quiet pleasure which I then had in watching
hour after hour their topmost boughs waving gracefully in the breeze.




CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR

THE ESCAPE


Nearly three weeks had elapsed since the second visit of Marnoo, and it
must have been more than four months since I entered the valley, when
one day about noon, and whilst everything was in profound silence,
Mow-Mow, the one-eyed chief, suddenly appeared at the door, and leaning
towards me as I lay directly facing him, said in a low tone, ‘Toby pemi
ena’ (Toby has arrived here). Gracious heaven! What a tumult of emotions
rushed upon me at this startling intelligence! Insensible to the pain
that had before distracted me, I leaped to my feet, and called wildly
to Kory-Kory who was reposing by my side. The startled islanders sprang
from their mats; the news was quickly communicated to them; and the
next moment I was making my way to the Ti on the back of Kory-Kory; and
surrounded by the excited savages.

All that I could comprehend of the particulars which Mow-Mow rehearsed
to his audience as we proceeded, was that my long-lost companion had
arrived in a boat which had just entered the bay. These tidings made
me most anxious to be carried at once to the sea, lest some untoward
circumstance should prevent our meeting; but to this they would not
consent, and continued their course towards the royal abode. As we
approached it, Mehevi and several chiefs showed themselves from the
piazza, and called upon us loudly to come to them.

As soon as we had approached, I endeavoured to make them understand that
I was going down to the sea to meet Toby. To this the king objected, and
motioned Kory-Kory to bring me into the house. It was in vain to resist;
and in a few moments I found myself within the Ti, surrounded by a noisy
group engaged in discussing the recent intelligence. Toby’s name was
frequently repeated, coupled with violent exclamations of astonishment.
It seemed as if they yet remained in doubt with regard to the fact of
his arrival, at at every fresh report that was brought from the shore
they betrayed the liveliest emotions.

Almost frenzied at being held in this state of suspense, I passionately
besought Mehevi to permit me to proceed. Whether my companion had
arrived or not, I felt a presentiment that my own fate was about to be
decided. Again and again I renewed my petition to Mehevi. He regarded me
with a fixed and serious eye, but at length yielding to my importunity,
reluctantly granted my request.

Accompanied by some fifty of the natives, I now rapidly continued my
journey; every few moments being transferred from the back of one
to another, and urging my bearer forward all the while with earnest
entreaties. As I thus hurried forward, no doubt as to the truth of the
information I had received ever crossed my mind.

I was alive only to the one overwhelming idea, that a chance of
deliverance was now afforded me, if the jealous opposition of the
savages could be overcome.

Having been prohibited from approaching the sea during the whole of my
stay in the valley, I had always associated with it the idea of escape.
Toby too--if indeed he had ever voluntarily deserted me--must have
effected this flight by the sea; and now that I was drawing near to
it myself, I indulged in hopes which I had never felt before. It was
evident that a boat had entered the bay, and I saw little reason to
doubt the truth of the report that it had brought my companion. Every
time therefore that we gained an elevation, I looked eagerly around,
hoping to behold him. In the midst of an excited throng, who by their
violent gestures and wild cries appeared to be under the influence of
some excitement as strong as my own, I was now borne along at a rapid
trot, frequently stooping my head to avoid the branches which crossed
the path, and never ceasing to implore those who carried me to
accelerate their already swift pace.

In this manner we had proceeded about four or five miles, when we were
met by a party of some twenty islanders, between whom and those who
accompanied me ensued an animated conference. Impatient of the delay
occasioned by this interruption, I was beseeching the man who carried me
to proceed without his loitering companions, when Kory-Kory, running
to my side, informed me, in three fatal words, that the news had all
proved, false--that Toby had not arrived--‘Toby owlee pemi’. Heaven only
knows how, in the state of mind and body I then was, I ever sustained
the agony which this intelligence caused me; not that the news was
altogether unexpected; but I had trusted that the fact might not have
been made known until we should have arrived upon the beach. As it was,
I at once foresaw the course the savages would pursue. They had only
yielded thus far to my entreaties, that I might give a joyful welcome to
my long-lost comrade; but now that it was known he had not arrived they
would at once oblige me to turn back.

My anticipations were but too correct. In spite of the resistance I
made, they carried me into a house which was near the spot, and left me
upon the mats. Shortly afterwards several of those who had accompanied
me from the Ti, detaching themselves from the others, proceeded in
the direction of the sea. Those who remained--among whom were Marheyo,
Mow-Mow, Kory-Kory, and Tinor--gathered about the dwelling, and appeared
to be awaiting their return.

This convinced me that strangers--perhaps some of my own countrymen--had
for some cause or other entered the bay. Distracted at the idea of their
vicinity, and reckless of the pain which I suffered, I heeded not the
assurances of the islanders, that there were no boats at the beach, but
starting to my feet endeavoured to gain the door. Instantly the passage
was blocked up by several men, who commanded me to resume my seat. The
fierce looks of the irritated savages admonished me that I could gain
nothing by force, and that it was by entreaty alone that I could hope to
compass my object.

Guided by this consideration, I turned to Mow-Mow, the only chief
present whom I had been much in the habit of seeing, and carefully
concealing, my real design, tried to make him comprehend that I still
believed Toby to have arrived on the shore, and besought him to allow me
to go forward to welcome him.

To all his repeated assertions, that my companion had not been seen,
I pretended to turn a deaf ear, while I urged my solicitations with an
eloquence of gesture which the one-eyed chief appeared unable to resist.
He seemed indeed to regard me as a forward child, to whose wishes he had
not the heart to oppose force, and whom he must consequently humour. He
spoke a few words to the natives, who at once retreated from the door,
and I immediately passed out of the house.

Here I looked earnestly round for Kory-Kory; but that hitherto faithful
servitor was nowhere to be seen. Unwilling to linger even for a single
instant when every moment might be so important, I motioned to a
muscular fellow near me to take me upon his back; to my surprise he
angrily refused. I turned to another, but with a like result. A third
attempt was as unsuccessful, and I immediately perceived what had
induced Mow-Mow to grant my request, and why the other natives conducted
themselves in so strange a manner. It was evident that the chief had
only given me liberty to continue my progress towards the sea, because
he supposed that I was deprived of the means of reaching it.

Convinced by this of their determination to retain me a captive, I
became desperate; and almost insensible to the pain which I suffered,
I seized a spear which was leaning against the projecting eaves of the
house, and supporting myself with it, resumed the path that swept by
the dwelling. To my surprise, I was suffered to proceed alone; all
the natives remaining in front of the house, and engaging in earnest
conversation, which every moment became more loud and vehement; and to
my unspeakable delight, I perceived that some difference of opinion
had arisen between them; that two parties, in short, were formed, and
consequently that in their divided counsels there was some chance of my
deliverance.

Before I had proceeded a hundred yards I was again surrounded by the
savages, who were still in all the heat of argument, and appeared every
moment as if they would come to blows. In the midst of this tumult
old Marheyo came to my side, and I shall never forget the benevolent
expression of his countenance. He placed his arm upon my shoulder, and
emphatically pronounced the only two English words I had taught him
‘Home’ and ‘Mother’. I at once understood what he meant, and eagerly
expressed my thanks to him. Fayaway and Kory-Kory were by his side, both
weeping violently; and it was not until the old man had twice repeated
the command that his son could bring himself to obey him, and take me
again upon his back. The one-eyed chief opposed his doing so, but he was
overruled, and, as it seemed to me, by some of his own party.

We proceeded onwards, and never shall I forget the ecstasy I felt when I
first heard the roar of the surf breaking upon the beach. Before long
I saw the flashing billows themselves through the opening between the
trees. Oh glorious sight and sound of ocean! with what rapture did I
hail you as familiar friends! By this time the shouts of the crowd
upon the beach were distinctly audible, and in the blended confusion
of sounds I almost fancied I could distinguish the voices of my own
countrymen.

When we reached the open space which lay between the groves and the sea,
the first object that met my view was an English whale-boat, lying with
her bow pointed from the shore, and only a few fathoms distant from it.
It was manned by five islanders, dressed in shirt tunics of calico. My
first impression was that they were in the very act of pulling out from
the bay; and that, after all my exertions, I had come too late. My soul
sunk within me: but a second glance convinced me that the boat was only
hanging off to keep out of the surf; and the next moment I heard my own
name shouted out by a voice from the midst of the crowd.

Looking in the direction of the sound, I perceived, to my indescribable
joy, the tall figure of Karakoee, an Oahu Kanaka, who had often been
aboard the ‘Dolly’, while she lay in Nukuheva. He wore the green
shooting-jacket with gilt buttons, which had been given to him by an
officer of the Reine Blanche--the French flag-ship--and in which I had
always seen him dressed. I now remembered the Kanaka had frequently told
me that his person was tabooed in all the valleys of the island, and the
sight of him at such a moment as this filled my heart with a tumult of
delight.

Karakoee stood near the edge of the water with a large roll of
cotton-cloth thrown over one arm, and holding two or three canvas bags
of powder, while with the other hand he grasped a musket, which he
appeared to be proffering to several of the chiefs around him. But they
turned with disgust from his offers and seemed to be impatient at
his presence, with vehement gestures waving him off to his boat, and
commanding him to depart.

The Kanaka, however, still maintained his ground, and I at once
perceived that he was seeking to purchase my freedom. Animated by the
idea, I called upon him loudly to come to me; but he replied, in broken
English, that the islanders had threatened to pierce him with their
spears, if he stirred a foot towards me. At this time I was still
advancing, surrounded by a dense throng of the natives, several of whom
had their hands upon me, and more than one javelin was threateningly
pointed at me. Still I perceived clearly that many of those least
friendly towards me looked irresolute and anxious. I was still some
thirty yards from Karakoee when my farther progress was prevented by the
natives, who compelled me to sit down upon the ground, while they still
retained their hold upon my arms. The din and tumult now became tenfold,
and I perceived that several of the priests were on the spot, all of
whom were evidently urging Mow-Mow and the other chiefs to prevent my
departure; and the detestable word ‘Roo-ne! Roo-ne!’ which I had heard
repeated a thousand times during the day, was now shouted out on every
side of me. Still I saw that the Kanaka continued his exertions in my
favour--that he was boldly debating the matter with the savages, and was
striving to entice them by displaying his cloth and powder, and snapping
the lock of his musket. But all he said or did appeared only to augment
the clamours of those around him, who seemed bent upon driving him into
the sea.

When I remembered the extravagant value placed by these people upon the
articles which were offered to them in exchange for me, and which
were so indignantly rejected, I saw a new proof of the same fixed
determination of purpose they had all along manifested with regard
to me, and in despair, and reckless of consequences, I exerted all my
strength, and shaking myself free from the grasp of those who held me, I
sprang upon my feet and rushed towards Karakoee.

The rash attempt nearly decided my fate; for, fearful that I might slip
from them, several of the islanders now raised a simultaneous shout,
and pressing upon Karakoee, they menaced him with furious gestures, and
actually forced him into the sea. Appalled at their violence, the poor
fellow, standing nearly to the waist in the surf, endeavoured to pacify
them; but at length fearful that they would do him some fatal violence,
he beckoned to his comrades to pull in at once, and take him into the
boat.

It was at this agonizing moment, when I thought all hope was ended, that
a new contest arose between the two parties who had accompanied me to
the shore; blows were struck, wounds were given, and blood flowed. In
the interest excited by the fray, every one had left me except Marheyo,
Kory-Kory and poor dear Fayaway, who clung to me, sobbing indignantly.
I saw that now or never was the moment. Clasping my hands together, I
looked imploringly at Marheyo, and move towards the now almost deserted
beach. The tears were in the old man’s eyes, but neither he nor
Kory-Kory attempted to hold me, and I soon reached the Kanaka, who had
anxiously watched my movements; the rowers pulled in as near as they
dared to the edge of the surf; I gave one parting embrace to Fayaway,
who seemed speechless with sorrow, and the next instant I found myself
safe in the boat, and Karakoee by my side, who told the rowers at once
to give way. Marheyo and Kory-Kory, and a great many of the women,
followed me into the water, and I was determined, as the only mark of
gratitude I could show, to give them the articles which had been brought
as my ransom. I handed the musket to Kory-Kory, with a rapid gesture
which was equivalent to a ‘Deed of Gift’; threw the roll of cotton to
old Marheyo, pointing as I did so to poor Fayaway, who had retired from
the edge of the water and was sitting down disconsolate on the shingles;
and tumbled the powder-bags out to the nearest young ladies, all of whom
were vastly willing to take them. This distribution did not occupy ten
seconds, and before it was over the boat was under full way; the Kanaka
all the while exclaiming loudly against what he considered a useless
throwing away of valuable property.

Although it was clear that my movements had been noticed by several of
the natives, still they had not suspended the conflict in which they
were engaged, and it was not until the boat was above fifty yards from
the shore that Mow-Mow and some six or seven other warriors rushed into
the sea and hurled their javelins at us. Some of the weapons passed
quite as close to us as was desirable, but no one was wounded, and the
men pulled away gallantly. But although soon out of the reach of the
spears, our progress was extremely slow; it blew strong upon the shore,
and the tide was against us; and I saw Karakoee, who was steering the
boat, give many a look towards a jutting point of the bay round which we
had to pass.

For a minute or two after our departure, the savages, who had formed
into different groups, remained perfectly motionless and silent. All
at-once the enraged chief showed by his gestures that he had resolved
what course he would take. Shouting loudly to his companions, and
pointing with his tomahawk towards the headland, he set off at full
speed in that direction, and was followed by about thirty of the
natives, among whom were several of the priests, all yelling out
‘Roo-ne! Roo-ne!’ at the very top of their voices. Their intention was
evidently to swim off from the headland and intercept us in our course.
The wind was freshening every minute, and was right in our teeth, and it
was one of those chopping angry seas in which it is so difficult to
row. Still the chances seemed in our favour, but when we came within a
hundred yards of the point, the active savages were already dashing into
the water, and we all feared that within five minutes’ time we should
have a score of the infuriated wretches around us. If so our doom
was sealed, for these savages, unlike the feeble swimmer of civilized
countries, are, if anything, more formidable antagonists in the water
than when on the land. It was all a trial of strength; our natives
pulled till their oars bent again, and the crowd of swimmers shot
through the water despite its roughness, with fearful rapidity.

By the time we had reached the headland, the savages were spread right
across our course. Our rowers got out their knives and held them ready
between their teeth, and I seized the boat-hook. We were all aware that
if they succeeded in intercepting us they would practise upon us the
manoeuvre which has proved so fatal to many a boat’s crew in these seas.
They would grapple the oars, and seizing hold of the gunwhale, capsize
the boat, and then we should be entirely at their mercy.

After a few breathless moments discerned Mow-Mow. The athletic islander,
with his tomahawk between his teeth, was dashing the water before him
till it foamed again. He was the nearest to us, and in another instant
he would have seized one of the oars. Even at the moment I felt horror
at the act I was about to commit; but it was no time for pity or
compunction, and with a true aim, and exerting all my strength, I dashed
the boat-hook at him. It struck him just below the throat, and forced
him downwards. I had no time to repeat the blow, but I saw him rise
to the surface in the wake of the boat, and never shall I forget the
ferocious expression of his countenance.

Only one other of the savages reached the boat. He seized the gunwhale,
but the knives of our rowers so mauled his wrists, that he was forced to
quit his hold, and the next minute we were past them all, and in safety.
The strong excitement which had thus far kept me up, now left me, and I
fell back fainting into the arms of Karakoee.

           . . . . . . . .

The circumstances connected with my most unexpected escape may be very
briefly stated. The captain of an Australian vessel, being in distress
for men in these remote seas, had put into Nukuheva in order to recruit
his ship’s company; but not a single man was to be obtained; and the
barque was about to get under weigh, when she was boarded by Karakoee,
who informed the disappointed Englishman that an American sailor
was detained by the savages in the neighbouring bay of Typee; and he
offered, if supplied with suitable articles of traffic, to undertake his
release. The Kanaka had gained his intelligence from Marnoo, to whom,
after all, I was indebted for my escape. The proposition was acceded to;
and Karakoee, taking with him five tabooed natives of Nukuheva, again
repaired aboard the barque, which in a few hours sailed to that part of
the island, and threw her main-top-sail aback right off the entrance
to the Typee bay. The whale-boat, manned by the tabooed crew, pulled
towards the head of the inlet, while the ship lay ‘off and on’ awaiting
its return.

The events which ensued have already been detailed, and little more
remains to be related. On reaching the ‘Julia’ I was lifted over the
side, and my strange appearance and remarkable adventure occasioned the
liveliest interest. Every attention was bestowed upon me that humanity
could suggest. But to such a state was I reduced, that three months
elapsed before I recovered my health.

The mystery which hung over the fate of my friend and companion Toby has
never been cleared up. I still remain ignorant whether he succeeded in
leaving the valley, or perished at the hands of the islanders.





THE STORY OF TOBY


The morning my comrade left me, as related in the narrative, he was
accompanied by a large party of the natives, some of them carrying fruit
and hogs for the purposes of traffic, as the report had spread that
boats had touched at the bay.

As they proceeded through the settled parts of the valley, numbers
joined them from every side, running with animated cries from every
pathway. So excited were the whole party, that eager as Toby was to gain
the beach, it was almost as much as he could do to keep up with them.
Making the valley ring with their shouts, they hurried along on a swift
trot, those in advance pausing now and then, and flourishing their
weapons to urge the rest forward.

Presently they came to a place where the paths crossed a bend of the
main stream of the valley. Here a strange sound came through the grove
beyond, and the Islanders halted. It was Mow-Mow, the one-eyed chief,
who had gone on before; he was striking his heavy lance against the
hollow bough of a tree.

This was a signal of alarm;--for nothing was now heard but shouts
of ‘Happar! Happar!’--the warriors tilting with their spears and
brandishing them in the air, and the women and boys shouting to each
other, and picking up the stones in the bed of the stream. In a moment
or two Mow-Mow and two or three other chiefs ran out from the grove, and
the din increased ten fold.

Now, thought Toby, for a fray; and being unarmed, he besought one of the
young men domiciled with Marheyo for the loan of his spear. But he was
refused; the youth roguishly telling him that the weapon was very good
for him (the Typee), but that a white man could fight much better with
his fists.

The merry humour of this young wag seemed to be shared by the rest, for
in spite of their warlike cries and gestures, everybody was capering
and laughing, as if it was one of the funniest things in the world to be
awaiting the flight of a score or two of Happar javelins from an ambush
in the thickets.

While my comrade was in vain trying to make out the meaning of all this,
a good number of the natives separated themselves from the rest and ran
off into the grove on one side, the others now keeping perfectly still,
as if awaiting the result. After a little while, however, Mow-Mow, who
stood in advance, motioned them to come on stealthily, which they did,
scarcely rustling a leaf. Thus they crept along for ten or fifteen
minutes, every now and then pausing to listen.

Toby by no means relished this sort of skulking; if there was going to
be a fight, he wanted it to begin at once. But all in good time,--for
just then, as they went prowling into the thickest of the wood, terrific
howls burst upon them on all sides, and volleys of darts and stones flew
across the path. Not an enemy was to be seen, and what was still more
surprising, not a single man dropped, though the pebbles fell among the
leaves like hail.

There was a moment’s pause, when the Typees, with wild shrieks, flung
themselves into the covert, spear in hand; nor was Toby behindhand.
Coming so near getting his skull broken by the stones, and animated by
an old grudge he bore the Happars, he was among the first to dash at
them. As he broke his way through the underbush, trying, as he did
so, to wrest a spear from a young chief, the shouts of battle all of a
sudden ceased, and the wood was as still as death. The next moment, the
party who had left them so mysteriously rushed out from behind every
bush and tree, and united with the rest in long and merry peals of
laughter.

It was all a sham, and Toby, who was quite out of breath with
excitement, was much incensed at being made a fool of.

It afterwards turned out that the whole affair had been concerted for
his particular benefit, though with what precise view it would be hard
to tell. My comrade was the more enraged at this boys’ play, since it
had consumed so much time, every moment of which might be precious.
Perhaps, however, it was partly intended for this very purpose; and he
was led to think so, because when the natives started again, he observed
that they did not seem to be in so great a hurry as before. At last,
after they had gone some distance, Toby, thinking all the while that
they never would get to the sea, two men came running towards them,
and a regular halt ensued, followed by a noisy discussion, during which
Toby’s name was often repeated. All this made him more and more anxious
to learn what was going on at the beach; but it was in vain that he now
tried to push forward; the natives held him back.

In a few moments the conference ended, and many of them ran down the
path in the direction of the water, the rest surrounding Toby, and
entreating him to ‘Moee’, or sit down and rest himself. As an additional
inducement, several calabashes of food, which had been brought along,
were now placed on the ground, and opened, and pipes also were lighted.
Toby bridled his impatience a while, but at last sprang to his feet
and dashed forward again. He was soon overtaken nevertheless, and again
surrounded, but without further detention was then permitted to go down
to the sea.

They came out upon a bright green space between the groves and the
water, and close under the shadow of the Happar mountain, where a path
was seen winding out of sight through a gorge.

No sign of a boat, however, was beheld, nothing but a tumultuous crowd
of men and women, and some one in their midst, earnestly talking to
them. As my comrade advanced, this person came forward and proved to
be no stranger. He was an old grizzled sailor, whom Toby and myself had
frequently seen in Nukuheva, where he lived an easy devil-may-care life
in the household of Mowanna the king, going by the name of ‘Jimmy’.
In fact he was the royal favourite, and had a good deal to say in his
master’s councils. He wore a Manilla hat and a sort of tappa morning
gown, sufficiently loose and negligent to show the verse of a song
tattooed upon his chest, and a variety of spirited cuts by native
artists in other parts of his body. He sported a fishing rod in his
hand, and carried a sooty old pipe slung about his neck.

This old rover having retired from active life, had resided in Nukuheva
some time--could speak the language, and for that reason was frequently
employed by the French as an interpreter. He was an arrant old gossip
too; for ever coming off in his canoe to the ships in the bay, and
regaling their crews with choice little morsels of court scandal--such,
for instance, as a shameful intrigue of his majesty with a Happar
damsel, a public dancer at the feasts--and otherwise relating some
incredible tales about the Marquesas generally. I remember in particular
his telling the Dolly’s crew what proved to be literally a cock-and-bull
story, about two natural prodigies which he said were then on the
island. One was an old monster of a hermit, having a marvellous
reputation for sanctity, and reputed a famous sorcerer, who lived away
off in a den among the mountains, where he hid from the world a
great pair of horns that grew out of his temples. Notwithstanding his
reputation for piety, this horrid old fellow was the terror of all the
island round, being reported to come out from his retreat, and go a
man-hunting every dark night. Some anonymous Paul Pry, too, coming down
the mountain, once got a peep at his den, and found it full of bones. In
short, he was a most unheard-of monster.

The other prodigy Jimmy told us about was the younger son of a chief,
who, although but just turned of ten, had entered upon holy orders,
because his superstitious countrymen thought him especially intended
for the priesthood from the fact of his having a comb on his head like
a rooster. But this was not all; for still more wonderful to relate, the
boy prided himself upon his strange crest, being actually endowed with a
cock’s voice, and frequently crowing over his peculiarity.

But to return to Toby. The moment he saw the old rover on the beach, he
ran up to him, the natives following after, and forming a circle round
them.

After welcoming him to the shore, Jimmy went on to tell him how that he
knew all about our having run away from the ship, and being among the
Typees. Indeed, he had been urged by Mowanna to come over to the valley,
and after visiting his friends there, to bring us back with him, his
royal master being exceedingly anxious to share with him the reward
which had been held out for our capture. He, however, assured Toby that
he had indignantly spurned the offer.

All this astonished my comrade not a little, as neither of us had
entertained the least idea that any white man ever visited the Typees
sociably. But Jimmy told him that such was the case nevertheless,
although he seldom came into the bay, and scarcely ever went back
from the beach. One of the priests of the valley, in some way or other
connected with an old tattooed divine in Nukuheva, was a friend of his,
and through him he was ‘taboo’.

He said, moreover, that he was sometimes employed to come round to the
bay, and engage fruit for ships lying in Nukuheva. In fact, he was now
on that very errand, according to his own account, having just come
across the mountains by the way of Happar. By noon of the next day the
fruit would be heaped up in stacks on the beach, in readiness for the
boats which he then intended to bring into the bay.

Jimmy now asked Toby whether he wished to leave the island--if he did,
there was a ship in want of men lying in the other harbour, and he would
be glad to take him over, and see him on board that very day.

‘No,’ said Toby, ‘I cannot leave the island unless my comrade goes with
me. I left him up the valley because they would not let him come down.
Let us go now and fetch him.’

‘But how is he to cross the mountain with us,’ replied Jimmy, ‘even if
we get him down to the beach? Better let him stay till tomorrow, and I
will bring him round to Nukuheva in the boats.’

‘That will never do,’ said Toby, ‘but come along with me now, and let
us get him down here at any rate,’ and yielding to the impulse of the
moment, he started to hurry back into the valley. But hardly was his
back turned, when a dozen hands were laid on him, and he learned that he
could not go a step further.

It was in vain that he fought with them; they would not hear of his
stirring from the beach. Cut to the heart at this unexpected repulse,
Toby now conjured the sailor to go after me alone. But Jimmy replied,
that in the mood the Typees then were they would not permit him so to
do, though at the same time he was not afraid of their offering him any
harm.

Little did Toby then think, as he afterwards had good reason to suspect,
that this very Jimmy was a heartless villain, who, by his arts, had just
incited the natives to restrain him as he was in the act of going after
me. Well must the old sailor have known, too, that the natives would
never consent to our leaving together, and he therefore wanted to get
Toby off alone, for a purpose which he afterwards made plain. Of all
this, however, my comrade now knew nothing.

He was still struggling with the islanders when Jimmy again came up to
him, and warned him against irritating them, saying that he was only
making matters worse for both of us, and if they became enraged, there
was no telling what might happen. At last he made Toby sit down on a
broken canoe by a pile of stones, upon which was a ruinous little shrine
supported by four upright poles, and in front partly screened by a net.
The fishing parties met there, when they came in from the sea, for their
offerings were laid before an image, upon a smooth black stone within.
This spot Jimmy said was strictly ‘taboo’, and no one would molest or
come near him while he stayed by its shadow. The old sailor then went
off, and began speaking very earnestly to Mow-Mow and some other chiefs,
while all the rest formed a circle round the taboo place, looking
intently at Toby, and talking to each other without ceasing.

Now, notwithstanding what Jimmy had just told him, there presently came
up to my comrade an old woman, who seated herself beside him on the
canoe.

‘Typee motarkee?’ said she. ‘Motarkee nuee,’ said Toby.

She then asked him whether he was going to Nukuheva; he nodded yes; and
with a plaintive wail and her eyes filling with tears she rose and left
him.

This old woman, the sailor afterwards said, was the wife of an aged king
of a small island valley, communicating by a deep pass with the country
of the Typees. The inmates of the two valleys were related to each other
by blood, and were known by the same name. The old woman had gone down
into the Typee valley the day before, and was now with three chiefs, her
sons, on a visit to her kinsmen.

As the old king’s wife left him, Jimmy again came up to Toby, and told
him that he had just talked the whole matter over with the natives, and
there was only one course for him to follow. They would not allow him to
go back into the valley, and harm would certainly come to both him and
me, if he remained much longer on the beach. ‘So,’ said he, ‘you and I
had better go to Nukuheva now overland, and tomorrow I will bring Tommo,
as they call him, by water; they have promised to carry him down to the
sea for me early in the morning, so that there will be no delay.’

‘No, no,’ said Toby desperately, ‘I will not leave him that way; we must
escape together.’

‘Then there is no hope for you,’ exclaimed the sailor, ‘for if I leave
you here on the beach, as soon as I am gone you will be carried back
into the valley, and then neither of you will ever look upon the
sea again.’ And with many oaths he swore that if he would only go to
Nukuheva with him that day, he would be sure to have me there the very
next morning.

‘But how do you know they will bring him down to the beach tomorrow,
when they will not do so today?’ said Toby. But the sailor had many
reasons, all of which were so mixed up with the mysterious customs
of the islanders, that he was none the wiser. Indeed, their conduct,
especially in preventing him from returning into the valley, was
absolutely unaccountable to him; and added to everything else, was the
bitter reflection, that the old sailor, after all, might possibly be
deceiving him. And then again he had to think of me, left alone with the
natives, and by no means well. If he went with Jimmy, he might at least
hope to procure some relief for me. But might not the savages who had
acted so strangely, hurry me off somewhere before his return? Then, even
if he remained, perhaps they would not let him go back into the valley
where I was.

Thus perplexed was my poor comrade; he knew not what to do, and his
courageous spirit was of no use to him now. There he was, all by
himself, seated upon the broken canoe--the natives grouped around him at
a distance, and eyeing him more and more fixedly. ‘It is getting late:
said Jimmy, who was standing behind the rest. ‘Nukuheva is far off, and
I cannot cross the Happar country by night. You see how it is;--if you
come along with me, all will be well; if you do not, depend upon it,
neither of you will ever escape.’

‘There is no help for it,’ said Toby, at last, with a heavy heart, ‘I
will have to trust you,’ and he came out from the shadow of the little
shrine, and cast a long look up the valley.

‘Now keep close to my side,’ said the sailor, ‘and let us be moving
quickly.’ Tinor and Fayaway here appeared; the kindhearted old woman
embracing Toby’s knees, and giving way to a flood of tears; while
Fayaway, hardly less moved, spoke some few words of English she had
learned, and held up three fingers before him--in so many days he would
return.

At last Jimmy pulled Toby out of the crowd, and after calling to a
young Typee who was standing by with a young pig in his arms, all three
started for the mountains.

‘I have told them that you are coming back again,’ said the old fellow,
laughing, as they began the ascent, ‘but they’ll have to wait a long
time.’ Toby turned, and saw the natives all in motion--the girls waving
their tappas in adieu, and the men their spears. As the last figure
entered the grove with one arm raised, and the three fingers spread, his
heart smote him.

As the natives had at last consented to his going, it might have been,
that some of them, at least, really counted upon his speedy return;
probably supposing, as indeed he had told them when they were coming
down the valley, that his only object in leaving them was to procure the
medicines I needed. This, Jimmy also must have told them. And as they
had done before, when my comrade, to oblige me, started on his perilous
journey to Nukuheva, they looked upon me, in his absence, as one of two
inseparable friends who was a sure guaranty for the other’s return.
This is only my own supposition, however, for as to all their strange
conduct, it is still a mystery.

‘You see what sort of a taboo man I am,’ said the sailor, after for some
time silently following the path which led up the mountain. ‘Mow-Mow
made me a present of this pig here, and the man who carries it will
go right through Happar, and down into Nukuheva with us. So long as he
stays by me he is safe, and just so it will be with you, and tomorrow
with Tommo. Cheer up, then, and rely upon me, you will see him in the
morning.’

The ascent of the mountain was not very difficult, owing to its being
near to the sea, where the island ridges are comparatively low; the
path, too, was a fine one, so that in a short time all three were
standing on the summit with the two valleys at their feet. The white
cascade marking the green head of the Typee valley first caught Toby’s
eye; Marheyo’s house could easily be traced by them.

As Jimmy led the way along the ridge, Toby observed that the valley of
the Happars did not extend near so far inland as that of the Typees.
This accounted for our mistake in entering the latter valley as we had.

A path leading down from the mountain was soon seen, and, following it,
the party were in a short time fairly in the Happar valley.

‘Now,’ said Jimmy, as they hurried on, ‘we taboo men have wives in all
the bays, and I am going to show you the two I have here.’

So, when they came to the house where he said they lived,--which was
close by the base of the mountain in a shady nook among the groves--he
went in, and was quite furious at finding it empty--the ladies, had gone
out. However, they soon made their appearance, and to tell the truth,
welcomed Jimmy quite cordially, as well as Toby, about whom they were
very inquisitive. Nevertheless, as the report of their arrival spread,
and the Happars began to assemble, it became evident that the appearance
of a white stranger among them was not by any means deemed so wonderful
an event as in the neighbouring valley.

The old sailor now bade his wives prepare something to eat, as he must
be in Nukuheva before dark. A meal of fish, bread-fruit, and bananas,
was accordingly served up, the party regaling themselves on the mats, in
the midst of a numerous company.

The Happars put many questions to Jimmy about Toby; and Toby himself
looked sharply at them, anxious to recognize the fellow who gave him the
wound from which he was still suffering. But this fiery gentleman, so
handy with his spear, had the delicacy, it seemed, to keep out of view.
Certainly the sight of him would not have been any added inducement to
making a stay in the valley,--some of the afternoon loungers in Happar
having politely urged Toby to spend a few days with them,--there was a
feast coming on. He, however, declined.

All this while the young Typee stuck to Jimmy like his shadow, and
though as lively a dog as any of his tribe, he was now as meek as
a lamb, never opening his mouth except to eat. Although some of the
Happars looked queerly at him, others were more civil, and seemed
desirous of taking him abroad and showing him the valley. But the Typee
was not to be cajoled in that way. How many yards he would have to
remove from Jimmy before the taboo would be powerless, it would be hard
to tell, but probably he himself knew to a fraction.

On the promise of a red cotton handkerchief, and something else which he
kept secret, this poor fellow had undertaken a rather ticklish journey,
though, as far as Toby could ascertain, it was something that had never
happened before.

The island-punch--arva--was brought in at the conclusion of the repast,
and passed round in a shallow calabash.

Now my comrade, while seated in the Happar house, began to feel more
troubled than ever at leaving me; indeed, so sad did he feel that he
talked about going back to the valley, and wanted Jimmy to escort him
as far as the mountains. But the sailor would not listen to him, and, by
way of diverting his thoughts, pressed him to drink of the arva. Knowing
its narcotic nature, he refused; but Jimmy said he would have something
mixed with it, which would convert it into an innocent beverage that
would inspirit them for the rest of their journey. So at last he was
induced to drink of it, and its effects were just as the sailor had
predicted; his spirits rose at once, and all his gloomy thoughts left
him.

The old rover now began to reveal his true character, though he was
hardly suspected at the time. ‘If I get you off to a ship,’ said he,
‘you will surely give a poor fellow something for saving you.’ In short,
before they left the house, he made Toby promise that he would give him
five Spanish dollars if he succeeded in getting any part of his wages
advanced from the vessel, aboard of which they were going; Toby,
moreover, engaging to reward him still further, as soon as my
deliverance was accomplished.

A little while after this they started again, accompanied by many of the
natives, and going up the valley, took a steep path near its head,
which led to Nukuheva. Here the Happars paused and watched them as they
ascended the mountain, one group of bandit-looking fellows, shaking
their spears and casting threatening glances at the poor Typee, whose
heart as well as heels seemed much the lighter when he came to look down
upon them.

On gaining the heights once more, their way led for a time along several
ridges covered with enormous ferns. At last they entered upon a wooded
tract, and here they overtook a party of Nukuheva natives, well armed,
and carrying bundles of long poles. Jimmy seemed to know them all very
well, and stopped for a while, and had a talk about the ‘Wee-Wees’, as
the people of Nukuheva call the Monsieurs.

The party with the poles were King Mowanna’s men, and by his orders they
had been gathering them in the ravines for his allies the French.

Leaving these fellows to trudge on with their loads, Toby and his
companions now pushed forward again, as the sun was already low in the
west. They came upon the valleys of Nukuheva on one side of the bay,
where the highlands slope off into the sea. The men-of-war were still
lying in the harbour, and as Toby looked down upon them, the strange
events which had happened so recently, seemed all a dream.

They soon descended towards the beach, and found themselves in Jimmy’s
house before it was well dark. Here he received another welcome from
his Nukuheva wives, and after some refreshments in the shape of cocoanut
milk and poee-poee, they entered a canoe (the Typee of course going
along) and paddled off to a whaleship which was anchored near the shore.
This was the vessel in want of men. Our own had sailed some time before.
The captain professed great pleasure at seeing Toby, but thought from
his exhausted appearance that he must be unfit for duty. However, he
agreed to ship him, as well as his comrade, as soon as he should arrive.
Toby begged hard for an armed boat, in which to go round to Typee and
rescue me, notwithstanding the promises of Jimmy. But this the captain
would not hear of, and told him to have patience, for the sailor would
be faithful to his word. When, too, he demanded the five silver dollars
for Jimmy, the captain was unwilling to give them. But Toby insisted
upon it, as he now began to think that Jimmy might be a mere mercenary,
who would be sure to prove faithless if not well paid. Accordingly he
not only gave him the money, but took care to assure him, over and over
again, that as soon as he brought me aboard he would receive a still
larger sum.

Before sun-rise the next day, Jimmy and the Typee started in two of the
ship’s boats, which were manned by tabooed natives. Toby, of course, was
all eagerness to go along, but the sailor told him that if he did, it
would spoil all; so, hard as it was, he was obliged to remain.

Towards evening he was on the watch, and descried the boats turning the
headland and entering the bay. He strained his eyes, and thought he saw
me; but I was not there. Descending from the mast almost distracted, he
grappled Jimmy as he struck the deck, shouting in a voice that startled
him, ‘Where is Tommo?’ The old fellow faltered, but soon recovering,
did all he could to soothe him, assuring him that it had proved to be
impossible to get me down to the shore that morning; assigning many
plausible reasons, and adding that early on the morrow he was going to
visit the bay again in a French boat, when, if he did not find me on the
beach--as this time he certainly expected to--he would march right back
into the valley, and carry me away at all hazards. He, however, again
refused to allow Toby to accompany him. Now, situated as Toby was, his
sole dependence for the present was upon this Jimmy, and therefore he
was fain to comfort himself as well as he could with what the old sailor
told him. The next morning, however, he had the satisfaction of seeing
the French boat start with Jimmy in it. Tonight, then, I will see him,
thought Toby; but many a long day passed before he ever saw Tommo again.
Hardly was the boat out of sight, when the captain came forward and
ordered the anchor weighed; he was going to sea.

Vain were all Toby’s ravings--they were disregarded; and when he came to
himself, the sails were set, and the ship fast leaving the land.

... ‘Oh!’ said he to me at our meeting, ‘what sleepless nights were
mine. Often I started from my hammock, dreaming you were before me, and
upbraiding me for leaving you on the island.’

       . . . . . . .

There is little more to be related. Toby left this vessel at New
Zealand, and after some further adventures, arrived home in less than
two years after leaving the Marquesas. He always thought of me as
dead--and I had every reason to suppose that he too was no more; but a
strange meeting was in store for us, one which made Toby’s heart all the
lighter.




NOTE.


The author was more than two years in the South Seas, after escaping
from the valley, as recounted in the last chapter. Some time after
returning home the foregoing narrative was published, though it was
little thought at the time that this would be the means of revealing
the existence of Toby, who had long been given up for lost. But so it
proved.

The story of his escape supplies a natural sequel to the adventure, and
as such it is now added to the volume. It was related to the author by
Toby himself, not ten days since.

New York, July, 1846.

Omoo

Adventures in the South Seas

by Herman Melville


Contents

 PART I
 CHAPTER I. MY RECEPTION ABOARD
 CHAPTER II. SOME ACCOUNT OF THE SHIP
 CHAPTER III. FURTHER ACCOUNT OF THE JULIA
 CHAPTER IV. A SCENE IN THE FORECASTLE
 CHAPTER V. WHAT HAPPENED AT HYTYHOO
 CHAPTER VI. WE TOUCH AT LA DOMINICA
 CHAPTER VII. WHAT HAPPENED AT HANNAMANOO
 CHAPTER VIII. THE TATTOOERS OF LA DOMINICA
 CHAPTER IX. WE STEER TO THE WESTWARD—STATE OF AFFAIRS
 CHAPTER X. A SEA-PARLOUR DESCRIBED, WITH SOME OF ITS TENANTS
 CHAPTER XI. DOCTOR LONG GHOST A WAG—ONE OF HIS CAPERS
 CHAPTER XII. DEATH AND BURIAL OF TWO OF THE CREW
 CHAPTER XIII. OUR DESTINATION CHANGED
 CHAPTER XIV. ROPE YARN
 CHAPTER XV. CHIPS AND BUNGS
 CHAPTER XVI. WE ENCOUNTER A GALE
 CHAPTER XVII. THE CORAL ISLANDS
 CHAPTER XVIII. TAHITI
 CHAPTER XIX. A SURPRISE—MORE ABOUT BEMBO
 CHAPTER XX. THE ROUND ROBIN—VISITORS FROM SHORE
 CHAPTER XXI. PROCEEDINGS OF THE CONSUL
 CHAPTER XXII. THE CONSUL’S DEPARTURE
 CHAPTER XXIII. THE SECOND NIGHT OFF PAPEETEE
 CHAPTER XXIV. OUTBREAK OF THE CREW
 CHAPTER XXV. JERMIN ENCOUNTERS AN OLD SHIPMATE
 CHAPTER XXVI. WE ENTER THE HARBOUR—JIM THE PILOT
 CHAPTER XXVII. A GLANCE AT PAPEETEE—WE ARE SENT ABOARD THE FRIGATE
 CHAPTER XXVIII. RECEPTION FROM THE FRENCHMAN
 CHAPTER XXIX. THE REINE BLANCHE
 CHAPTER XXX. THEY TAKE US ASHORE—WHAT HAPPENED THERE
 CHAPTER XXXI. THE CALABOOZA BERETANEE
 CHAPTER XXXII. PROCEEDINGS OF THE FRENCH AT TAHITI
 CHAPTER XXXIII. WE RECEIVE CALLS AT THE HOTEL DE CALABOOZA
 CHAPTER XXXIV. LIFE AT THE CALABOOZA
 CHAPTER XXXV. VISIT FROM AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE
 CHAPTER XXXVI. WE ARE CARRIED BEFORE THE CONSUL AND CAPTAIN
 CHAPTER XXXVII. THE FRENCH PRIESTS PAY THEIR RESPECTS
 CHAPTER XXXVIII. LITTLE JULIA SAILS WITHOUT US
 CHAPTER XXXIX. JERMIN SERVES US A GOOD TURN—FRIENDSHIPS IN POLYNESIA

 PART II
 CHAPTER XL. WE TAKE UNTO OURSELVES FRIENDS
 CHAPTER XLI. WE LEVY CONTRIBUTIONS ON THE SHIPPING
 CHAPTER XLII. MOTOO-OTOO A TAHITIAN CASUIST
 CHAPTER XLIII. ONE IS JUDGED BY THE COMPANY HE KEEPS
 CHAPTER XLIV. CATHEDRAL OF PAPOAR—THE CHURCH OP THE COCOA-NUTS
 CHAPTER XLV. MISSIONARY’S SERMON; WITH SOME REFLECTIONS
 CHAPTER XLVI. SOMETHING ABOUT THE KANNAKIPPERS
 CHAPTER XLVII. HOW THEY DRESS IN TAHITI
 CHAPTER XLVIII. TAHITI AS IT IS
 CHAPTER XLIX. SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED
 CHAPTER L. SOMETHING HAPPENS TO LONG GHOST
 CHAPTER LI. WILSON GIVES US THE CUT—DEPARTURE FOR IMEEO
 CHAPTER LII. THE VALLEY OF MARTAIR
 CHAPTER LIII. FARMING IN POLYNESIA
 CHAPTER LIV. SOME ACCOUNT OF THE WILD CATTLE IN POLYNESIA
 CHAPTER LV. A HUNTING RAMBLE WITH ZEKE
 CHAPTER LVI. MOSQUITOES
 CHAPTER LVII. THE SECOND HUNT IN THE MOUNTAINS
 CHAPTER LVIII. THE HUNTING-FEAST; AND A VISIT TO AFREHITOO
 CHAPTER LIX. THE MURPHIES
 CHAPTER LX. WHAT THEY THOUGHT OF US IN MARTAIR
 CHAPTER LXI. PREPARING FOR THE JOURNEY
 CHAPTER LXII. TAMAI
 CHAPTER LXIII. A DANCE IN THE VALLEY
 CHAPTER LXIV. MYSTERIOUS
 CHAPTER LXV. THE HEGIRA, OR FLIGHT
 CHAPTER LXVI. HOW WE WERE TO GET TO TALOO
 CHAPTER LXVII. THE JOURNEY ROUND THE BEACH
 CHAPTER LXVIII. A DINNER-PARTY IN IMEEO
 CHAPTER LXIX. THE COCOA-PALM
 CHAPTER LXX. LIFE AT LOOHOOLOO
 CHAPTER LXXI. WE START FOR TALOO
 CHAPTER LXXII. A DEALER IN THE CONTRABAND
 CHAPTER LXXIII. OUR RECEPTION IN PARTOOWYE
 CHAPTER LXXIV. RETIRING FOR THE NIGHT—THE DOCTOR GROWS DEVOUT
 CHAPTER LXXV. A RAMBLE THROUGH THE SETTLEMENT
 CHAPTER LXXVI. AN ISLAND JILT—WE VISIT THE SHIP
 CHAPTER LXXVII. A PARTY OF ROVERS—LITTLE LOO AND THE DOCTOR
 CHAPTER LXXVIII. MRS. BELL
 CHAPTER LXXIX. TALOO CHAPEL—HOLDING COURT IN POLYNESIA
 CHAPTER LXXX. QUEEN POMAREE
 CHAPTER LXXXI. WE VISIT THE COURT
 CHAPTER LXXXII. WHICH ENDS THE BOOK




PART I




CHAPTER I.
MY RECEPTION ABOARD


It was the middle of a bright tropical afternoon that we made good our
escape from the bay. The vessel we sought lay with her main-topsail
aback about a league from the land, and was the only object that broke
the broad expanse of the ocean.

On approaching, she turned out to be a small, slatternly-looking craft,
her hull and spars a dingy black, rigging all slack and bleached nearly
white, and everything denoting an ill state of affairs aboard. The four
boats hanging from her sides proclaimed her a whaler. Leaning
carelessly over the bulwarks were the sailors, wild, haggard-looking
fellows in Scotch caps and faded blue frocks; some of them with cheeks
of a mottled bronze, to which sickness soon changes the rich
berry-brown of a seaman’s complexion in the tropics.

On the quarter-deck was one whom I took for the chief mate. He wore a
broad-brimmed Panama hat, and his spy-glass was levelled as we
advanced.

When we came alongside, a low cry ran fore and aft the deck, and
everybody gazed at us with inquiring eyes. And well they might. To say
nothing of the savage boat’s crew, panting with excitement, all gesture
and vociferation, my own appearance was calculated to excite curiosity.
A robe of the native cloth was thrown over my shoulders, my hair and
beard were uncut, and I betrayed other evidences of my recent
adventure. Immediately on gaining the deck, they beset me on all sides
with questions, the half of which I could not answer, so incessantly
were they put.

As an instance of the curious coincidences which often befall the
sailor, I must here mention that two countenances before me were
familiar. One was that of an old man-of-war’s-man, whose acquaintance I
had made in Rio de Janeiro, at which place touched the ship in which I
sailed from home. The other was a young man whom, four years previous,
I had frequently met in a sailor boarding-house in Liverpool. I
remembered parting with him at Prince’s Dock Gates, in the midst of a
swarm of police-officers, trackmen, stevedores, beggars, and the like.
And here we were again:—years had rolled by, many a league of ocean had
been traversed, and we were thrown together under circumstances which
almost made me doubt my own existence.

But a few moments passed ere I was sent for into the cabin by the
captain.

He was quite a young man, pale and slender, more like a sickly
counting-house clerk than a bluff sea-captain. Bidding me be seated, he
ordered the steward to hand me a glass of Pisco. In the state I was,
this stimulus almost made me delirious; so that of all I then went on
to relate concerning my residence on the island I can scarcely remember
a word. After this I was asked whether I desired to “ship”; of course I
said yes; that is, if he would allow me to enter for one cruise,
engaging to discharge me, if I so desired, at the next port. In this
way men are frequently shipped on board whalemen in the South Seas. My
stipulation was acceded to, and the ship’s articles handed me to sign.

The mate was now called below, and charged to make a “well man” of me;
not, let it be borne in mind, that the captain felt any great
compassion for me, he only desired to have the benefit of my services
as soon as possible.

Helping me on deck, the mate stretched me out on the windlass and
commenced examining my limb; and then doctoring it after a fashion with
something from the medicine-chest, rolled it up in a piece of an old
sail, making so big a bundle that, with my feet resting on the
windlass, I might have been taken for a sailor with the gout. While
this was going on, someone removing my tappa cloak slipped on a blue
frock in its place, and another, actuated by the same desire to make a
civilized mortal of me, flourished about my head a great pair lie
imminent jeopardy of both ears, and the certain destruction of hair and
beard.

The day was now drawing to a close, and, as the land faded from my
sight, I was all alive to the change in my condition. But how far short
of our expectations is oftentimes the fulfilment of the most ardent
hopes. Safe aboard of a ship—so long my earnest prayer—with home and
friends once more in prospect, I nevertheless felt weighed down by a
melancholy that could not be shaken off. It was the thought of never
more seeing those who, notwithstanding their desire to retain me a
captive, had, upon the whole, treated me so kindly. I was leaving them
for ever.

So unforeseen and sudden had been my escape, so excited had I been
through it all, and so great the contrast between the luxurious repose
of the valley, and the wild noise and motion of a ship at sea, that at
times my recent adventures had all the strangeness of a dream; and I
could scarcely believe that the same sun now setting over a waste of
waters, had that very morning risen above the mountains and peered in
upon me as I lay on my mat in Typee.

Going below into the forecastle just after dark, I was inducted into a
wretched “bunk” or sleeping-box built over another. The rickety bottoms
of both were spread with several pieces of a blanket. A battered tin
can was then handed me, containing about half a pint of “tea”—so called
by courtesy, though whether the juice of such stalks as one finds
floating therein deserves that title, is a matter all shipowners must
settle with their consciences. A cube of salt beef, on a hard round
biscuit by way of platter, was also handed up; and without more ado, I
made a meal, the salt flavour of which, after the Nebuchadnezzar fare
of the valley, was positively delicious.

While thus engaged, an old sailor on a chest just under me was puffing
out volumes of tobacco smoke. My supper finished, he brushed the stem
of his sooty pipe against the sleeve of his frock, and politely waved
it toward me. The attention was sailor-like; as for the nicety of the
thing, no man who has lived in forecastles is at all fastidious; and
so, after a few vigorous whiffs to induce repose, I turned over and
tried my best to forget myself. But in vain. My crib, instead of
extending fore and aft, as it should have done, was placed athwart
ships, that is, at right angles to the keel, and the vessel, going
before the wind, rolled to such a degree, that-every time my heels went
up and my head went down, I thought I was on the point of turning a
somerset. Beside this, there were still more annoying causes of
inquietude; and every once in a while a splash of water came down the
open scuttle, and flung the spray in my face.

At last, after a sleepless night, broken twice by the merciless call of
the watch, a peep of daylight struggled into view from above, and
someone came below. It was my old friend with the pipe.

“Here, shipmate,” said I, “help me out of this place, and let me go on
deck.”

“Halloa, who’s that croaking?” was the rejoinder, as he peered into the
obscurity where I lay. “Ay, Typee, my king of the cannibals, is it you
I But I say, my lad, how’s that spar of your’n? the mate says it’s in a
devil of a way; and last night set the steward to sharpening the
handsaw: hope he won’t have the carving of ye.”

Long before daylight we arrived off the bay of Nukuheva, and making
short tacks until morning, we then ran in and sent a boat ashore with
the natives who had brought me to the ship. Upon its return, we made
sail again, and stood off from the land. There was a fine breeze; and
notwithstanding my bad night’s rest, the cool, fresh air of a morning
at sea was so bracing, mat, as soon as I breathed it, my spirits rose
at once.

Seated upon the windlass the greater portion of the day, and chatting
freely with the men, I learned the history of the voyage thus far, and
everything respecting the ship and its present condition.

These matters I will now throw together in the next chapter.




 CHAPTER II.
SOME ACCOUNT OF THE SHIP


First and foremost, I must give some account of the Julia herself; or
“Little Jule,” as the sailors familiarly styled her.

She was a small barque of a beautiful model, something more than two
hundred tons, Yankee-built and very old. Fitted for a privateer out of
a New England port during the war of 1812, she had been captured at sea
by a British cruiser, and, after seeing all sorts of service, was at
last employed as a government packet in the Australian seas. Being
condemned, however, about two years previous, she was purchased at
auction by a house in Sydney, who, after some slight repairs,
dispatched her on the present voyage.

Notwithstanding the repairs, she was still in a miserable plight. The
lower masts were said to be unsound; the standing rigging was much
worn; and, in some places, even the bulwarks were quite rotten. Still,
she was tolerably tight, and but little more than the ordinary pumping
of a morning served to keep her free.

But all this had nothing to do with her sailing; at that, brave Little
Jule, plump Little Jule, was a witch. Blow high, or blow low, she was
always ready for the breeze; and when she dashed the waves from her
prow, and pranced, and pawed the sea, you never thought of her patched
sails and blistered hull. How the fleet creature would fly before the
wind! rolling, now and then, to be sure, but in very playfulness.
Sailing to windward, no gale could bow her over: with spars erect, she
looked right up into the wind’s eye, and so she went.

But after all, Little Jule was not to be confided in. Lively enough,
and playful she was, but on that very account the more to be
distrusted. Who knew, but that like some vivacious old mortal all at
once sinking into a decline, she might, some dark night, spring a leak
and carry us all to the bottom. However, she played us no such ugly
trick, and therefore, I wrong Little Jule in supposing it.

She had a free roving commission. According to her papers she might go
whither she pleased—whaling, sealing, or anything else. Sperm whaling,
however, was what she relied upon; though, as yet, only two fish had
been brought alongside.

The day they sailed out of Sydney Heads, the ship’s company, all told,
numbered some thirty-two souls; now, they mustered about twenty; the
rest had deserted. Even the three junior mates who had headed the
whaleboats were gone: and of the four harpooners, only one was left, a
wild New Zealander, or “Mowree” as his countrymen are more commonly
called in the Pacific. But this was not all. More than half the seamen
remaining were more or less unwell from a long sojourn in a dissipated
port; some of them wholly unfit for duty, one or two dangerously ill,
and the rest managing to stand their watch though they could do but
little.

The captain was a young cockney, who, a few years before, had emigrated
to Australia, and, by some favouritism or other, had procured the
command of the vessel, though in no wise competent. He was essentially
a landsman, and though a man of education, no more meant for the sea
than a hairdresser. Hence everybody made fun of him. They called him
“The Cabin Boy,” “Paper Jack,” and half a dozen other undignified
names. In truth, the men made no secret of the derision in which they
held him; and as for the slender gentleman himself, he knew it all very
well, and bore himself with becoming meekness. Holding as little
intercourse with them as possible, he left everything to the chief
mate, who, as the story went, had been given his captain in charge.
Yet, despite his apparent unobtrusiveness, the silent captain had more
to do with the men than they thought. In short, although one of your
sheepish-looking fellows, he had a sort of still, timid cunning, which
no one would have suspected, and which, for that very reason, was all
the more active. So the bluff mate, who always thought he did what he
pleased, was occasionally made a fool of; and some obnoxious measures
which he carried out, in spite of all growlings, were little thought to
originate with the dapper little fellow in nankeen jacket and white
canvas pumps. But, to all appearance, at least, the mate had everything
his own way; indeed, in most things this was actually the case; and it
was quite plain that the captain stood in awe of him.

So far as courage, seamanship, and a natural aptitude for keeping
riotous spirits in subjection were concerned, no man was better
qualified for his vocation than John Jermin. He was the very beau-ideal
of the efficient race of short, thick-set men. His hair curled in
little rings of iron gray all over his round bullet head. As for his
countenance, it was strongly marked, deeply pitted with the small-pox.
For the rest, there was a fierce little squint out of one eye; the nose
had a rakish twist to one side; while his large mouth, and great white
teeth, looked absolutely sharkish when he laughed. In a word, no one,
after getting a fair look at him, would ever think of improving the
shape of his nose, wanting in symmetry as it was. Notwithstanding his
pugnacious looks, however, Jermin had a heart as big as a bullock’s;
that you saw at a glance.

Such was our mate; but he had one failing: he abhorred all weak
infusions, and cleaved manfully to strong drink.. At all times he was
more or less under the influence of it. Taken in moderate quantities, I
believe, in my soul, it did a man like him good; brightened his eyes,
swept the cobwebs out of his brain, and regulated his pulse. But the
worst of it was, that sometimes he drank too much, and a more
obstreperous fellow than Jermin in his cups, you seldom came across. He
was always for having a fight; but the very men he flogged loved him as
a brother, for he had such an irresistibly good-natured way of knocking
them down, that no one could find it in his heart to bear malice
against him. So much for stout little Jermin.

All English whalemen are bound by-law to carry a physician, who, of
course, is rated a gentleman, and lives in the cabin, with nothing but
his professional duties to attend to; but incidentally he drinks “flip”
and plays cards with the captain. There was such a worthy aboard of the
Julia; but, curious to tell, he lived in the forecastle with the men.
And this was the way it happened.

In the early part of the voyage the doctor and the captain lived
together as pleasantly as could be. To say nothing of many a can they
drank over the cabin transom, both of them had read books, and one of
them had travelled; so their stories never flagged. But once on a time
they got into a dispute about politics, and the doctor, moreover,
getting into a rage, drove home an argument with his fist, and left the
captain on the floor literally silenced. This was carrying it with a
high hand; so he was shut up in his state-room for ten days, and left
to meditate on bread and water, and the impropriety of flying into a
passion. Smarting under his disgrace, he undertook, a short time after
his liberation, to leave the vessel clandestinely at one of the
islands, but was brought back ignominiously, and again shut up. Being
set at large for the second time, he vowed he would not live any longer
with the captain, and went forward with his chests among the sailors,
where he was received with open arms as a good fellow and an injured
man.

I must give some further account of him, for he figures largely in the
narrative. His early history, like that of many other heroes, was
enveloped in the profoundest obscurity; though he threw out hints of a
patrimonial estate, a nabob uncle, and an unfortunate affair which sent
him a-roving. All that was known, however, was this. He had gone out to
Sydney as assistant-surgeon of an emigrant ship. On his arrival there,
he went back into the country, and after a few months’ wanderings,
returned to Sydney penniless, and entered as doctor aboard of the
Julia.

His personal appearance was remarkable. He was over six feet high—a
tower of bones, with a complexion absolutely colourless, fair hair, and
a light unscrupulous gray eye, twinkling occasionally at the very devil
of mischief. Among the crew, he went by the name of the Long Doctor, or
more frequently still, Doctor Long Ghost. And from whatever high estate
Doctor Long Ghost might have fallen, he had certainly at some time or
other spent money, drunk Burgundy, and associated with gentlemen.

As for his learning, he quoted Virgil, and talked of Hobbs of
Malmsbury, beside repeating poetry by the canto, especially Hudibras.
He was, moreover, a man who had seen the world. In the easiest way
imaginable, he could refer to an amour he had in Palermo, his
lion-hunting before breakfast among the Caffres, and the quality of the
coffee to be drunk in Muscat; and about these places, and a hundred
others, he had more anecdotes than I can tell of. Then such mellow old
songs as he sang, in a voice so round and racy, the real juice of
sound. How such notes came forth from his lank body was a constant
marvel.

Upon the whole, Long Ghost was as entertaining a companion as one could
wish; and to me in the Julia, an absolute godsend.




CHAPTER III.
FURTHER ACCOUNT OF THE JULIA


Owing to the absence of anything like regular discipline, the vessel
was in a state of the greatest uproar. The captain, having for some
time past been more or less confined to the cabin from sickness, was
seldom seen. The mate, however, was as hearty as a young lion, and ran
about the decks making himself heard at all hours. Bembo, the New
Zealand harpooner, held little intercourse with anybody but the mate,
who could talk to him freely in his own lingo. Part of his time he
spent out on the bowsprit, fishing for albicores with a bone hook; and
occasionally he waked all hands up of a dark night dancing some
cannibal fandango all by himself on the forecastle. But, upon the
whole, he was remarkably quiet, though something in his eye showed he
was far from being harmless.

Doctor Long Ghost, having sent in a written resignation as the ship’s
doctor, gave himself out as a passenger for Sydney, and took the world
quite easy. As for the crew, those who were sick seemed marvellously
contented for men in their condition; and the rest, not displeased with
the general licence, gave themselves little thought of the morrow.

The Julia’s provisions were very poor. When opened, the barrels of pork
looked as if preserved in iron rust, and diffused an odour like a stale
ragout. The beef was worse yet; a mahogany-coloured fibrous substance,
so tough and tasteless, that I almost believed the cook’s story of a
horse’s hoof with the shoe on having been fished up out of the pickle
of one of the casks. Nor was the biscuit much better; nearly all of it
was broken into hard, little gunflints, honeycombed through and
through, as if the worms usually infesting this article in long
tropical voyages had, in boring after nutriment, come out at the
antipodes without finding anything.

Of what sailors call “small stores,” we had but little. “Tea,” however,
we had in abundance; though, I dare say, the Hong merchants never had
the shipping of it. Beside this, every other day we had what English
seamen call “shot soup”—great round peas, polishing themselves like
pebbles by rolling about in tepid water.

It was afterward told me, that all our provisions had been purchased by
the owners at an auction sale of condemned navy stores in Sydney.

But notwithstanding the wateriness of the first course of soup, and the
saline flavour of the beef and pork, a sailor might have made a
satisfactory meal aboard of the Julia had there been any side dishes—a
potato or two, a yam, or a plantain. But there was nothing of the kind.
Still, there was something else, which, in the estimation of the men,
made up for all deficiencies; and that was the regular allowance of
Pisco.

It may seem strange that in such a state of affairs the captain should
be willing to keep the sea with his ship. But the truth was, that by
lying in harbour, he ran the risk of losing the remainder of his men by
desertion; and as it was, he still feared that, in some outlandish bay
or other, he might one day find his anchor down, and no crew to weigh
it.

With judicious officers the most unruly seamen can at sea be kept in
some sort of subjection; but once get them within a cable’s length of
the land, and it is hard restraining them. It is for this reason that
many South Sea whalemen do not come to anchor for eighteen or twenty
months on a stretch. When fresh provisions are needed, they run for the
nearest land—heave to eight or ten miles off, and send a boat ashore to
trade. The crews manning vessels like these are for the most part
villains of all nations and dyes; picked up in the lawless ports of the
Spanish Main, and among the savages of the islands. Like galley-slaves,
they are only to be governed by scourges and chains. Their officers go
among them with dirk and pistol—concealed, but ready at a grasp.

Not a few of our own crew were men of this stamp; but, riotous at times
as they were, the bluff drunken energies of Jennin were just the thing
to hold them in some sort of noisy subjection. Upon an emergency, he
flew in among them, showering his kicks and cuffs right and left, and
“creating a sensation” in every direction. And as hinted before, they
bore this knock-down authority with great good-humour. A sober,
discreet, dignified officer could have done nothing with them; such a
set would have thrown him and his dignity overboard.

Matters being thus, there was nothing for the ship but to keep the sea.
Nor was the captain without hope that the invalid portion of his crew,
as well as himself, would soon recover; and then there was no telling
what luck in the fishery might yet be in store for us. At any rate, at
the time of my coming aboard, the report was, that Captain Guy was
resolved upon retrieving the past and filling the vessel with oil in
the shortest space possible.

With this intention, we were now shaping our course for Hytyhoo, a
village on the island of St. Christina—one of the Marquesas, and so
named by Mendanna—for the purpose of obtaining eight seamen, who, some
weeks before, had stepped ashore there from the Julia. It was supposed
that, by this time, they must have recreated themselves sufficiently,
and would be glad to return to their duty.

So to Hytyhoo, with all our canvas spread, and coquetting with the
warm, breezy Trades, we bowled along; gliding up and down the long,
slow swells, the bonettas and albicores frolicking round us.




CHAPTER IV.
A SCENE IN THE FORECASTLE


I had scarcely been aboard of the ship twenty-four hours, when a
circumstance occurred, which, although noways picturesque, is so
significant of the state of affairs that I cannot forbear relating it.

In the first place, however, it must be known, that among the crew was
a man so excessively ugly, that he went by the ironical appellation of
“Beauty.” He was the ship’s carpenter; and for that reason was
sometimes known by his nautical cognomen of “Chips.” There was no
absolute deformity about the man; he was symmetrically ugly. But ill
favoured as he was in person, Beauty was none the less ugly in temper;
but no one could blame him; his countenance had soured his heart. Now
Jermin and Beauty were always at swords’ points. The truth was, the
latter was the only man in the ship whom the mate had never decidedly
got the better of; and hence the grudge he bore him. As for Beauty, he
prided himself upon talking up to the mate, as we shall soon see.

Toward evening there was something to be done on deck, and the
carpenter who belonged to the watch was missing. “Where’s that skulk,
Chips?” shouted Jermin down the forecastle scuttle.

“Taking his ease, d’ye see, down here on a chest, if you want to know,”
replied that worthy himself, quietly withdrawing his pipe from his
mouth. This insolence flung the fiery little mate into a mighty rage;
but Beauty said nothing, puffing away with all the tranquillity
imaginable. Here it must be remembered that, never mind what may be the
provocation, no prudent officer ever dreams of entering a ship’s
forecastle on a hostile visit. If he wants to see anybody who happens
to be there, and refuses to come up, why he must wait patiently until
the sailor is willing. The reason is this. The place is very dark: and
nothing is easier than to knock one descending on the head, before he
knows where he is, and a very long while before he ever finds out who
did it.

Nobody knew this better than Jermin, and so he contented himself with
looking down the scuttle and storming. At last Beauty made some cool
observation which set him half wild.

“Tumble on deck,” he then bellowed—“come, up with you, or I’ll jump
down and make you.” The carpenter begged him to go about it at once.

No sooner said than done: prudence forgotten, Jermin was there; and by
a sort of instinct, had his man by the throat before he could well see
him. One of the men now made a rush at him, but the rest dragged him
off, protesting that they should have fair play.

“Now come on deck,” shouted the mate, struggling like a good fellow to
hold the carpenter fast.

“Take me there,” was the dogged answer, and Beauty wriggled about in
the nervous grasp of the other like a couple of yards of
boa-constrictor.

His assailant now undertook to make him up into a compact bundle, the
more easily to transport him. While thus occupied, Beauty got his arms
loose, and threw him over backward. But Jermin quickly recovered
himself, when for a time they had it every way, dragging each other
about, bumping their heads against the projecting beams, and returning
each other’s blows the first favourable opportunity that offered.
Unfortunately, Jermin at last slipped and fell; his foe seating himself
on his chest, and keeping him down. Now this was one of those
situations in which the voice of counsel, or reproof, comes with
peculiar unction. Nor did Beauty let the opportunity slip. But the mate
said nothing in reply, only foaming at the mouth and struggling to
rise.

Just then a thin tremor of a voice was heard from above. It was the
captain; who, happening to ascend to the quarter-deck at the
commencement of the scuffle, would gladly have returned to the cabin,
but was prevented by the fear of ridicule. As the din increased, and it
became evident that his officer was in serious trouble, he thought it
would never do to stand leaning over the bulwarks, so he made his
appearance on the forecastle, resolved, as his best policy, to treat
the matter lightly.

“Why, why,” he begun, speaking pettishly, and very fast, “what’s all
this about?—Mr. Jermin, Mr. Jermin—carpenter, carpenter; what are you
doing down there? Come on deck; come on deck.”

Whereupon Doctor Long Ghost cries out in a squeak, “Ah! Miss Guy, is
that you? Now, my dear, go right home, or you’ll get hurt.”

“Pooh, pooh! you, sir, whoever you are, I was not speaking to you; none
of your nonsense. Mr. Jermin, I was talking to you; have the kindness
to come on deck, sir; I want to see you.”

“And how, in the devil’s name, am I to get there?” cried the mate,
furiously. “Jump down here, Captain Guy, and show yourself a man. Let
me up, you Chips! unhand me, I say! Oh! I’ll pay you for this, some
day! Come on, Captain Guy!”

At this appeal, the poor man was seized with a perfect spasm of
fidgets. “Pooh, pooh, carpenter; have done with your nonsense! Let him
up, sir; let him up! Do you hear? Let Mr. Jermm come on deck!”

“Go along with you, Paper Jack,” replied Beauty; “this quarrel’s
between the mate and me; so go aft, where you belong!”

As the captain once more dipped his head down the scuttle to make
answer, from an unseen hand he received, full in the face, the contents
of a tin can of soaked biscuit and tea-leaves. The doctor was not far
off just then. Without waiting for anything more, the discomfited
gentleman, with both hands to his streaming face, retreated to the
quarter-deck.

A few moments more, and Jermin, forced to a compromise, followed after,
in his torn frock and scarred face, looking for all the world as if he
had just disentangled himself from some intricate piece of machinery.
For about half an hour both remained in the cabin, where the mate’s
rough tones were heard high above the low, smooth voice of the captain.

Of all his conflicts with the men, this was the first in which Jermin
had been worsted; and he was proportionably enraged. Upon going
below—as the steward afterward told us—he bluntly informed Guy that,
for the future, he might look out for his ship himself; for his part,
he had done with her, if that was the way he allowed his officers to be
treated. After many high words, the captain finally assured him that,
the first fitting opportunity, the carpenter should be cordially
flogged; though, as matters stood, the experiment would be a hazardous
one. Upon this Jermin reluctantly consented to drop the matter for the
present; and he soon drowned all thoughts of it in a can of flip, which
Guy had previously instructed the steward to prepare, as a sop to allay
his wrath.

Nothing more ever came of this.




CHAPTER V.
WHAT HAPPENED AT HYTYHOO


Less than forty-eight hours after leaving Nukuheva, the blue, looming
island of St. Christina greeted us from afar. Drawing near the shore,
the grim, black spars and waspish hull of a small man-of-war craft
crept into view; the masts and yards lined distinctly against the sky.
She was riding to her anchor in the bay, and proved to be a French
corvette.

This pleased our captain exceedingly, and, coming on deck, he examined
her from the mizzen rigging with his glass. His original intention was
not to let go an anchor; but, counting upon the assistance of the
corvette in case of any difficulty, he now changed his mind, and
anchored alongside of her. As soon as a boat could be lowered, he then
went off to pay his respects to the commander, and, moreover, as we
supposed, to concert measures for the apprehension of the runaways.

Returning in the course of twenty minutes, he brought along with him
two officers in undress and whiskers, and three or four drunken
obstreperous old chiefs; one with his legs thrust into the armholes of
a scarlet vest, another with a pair of spurs on his heels, and a third
in a cocked hat and feather. In addition to these articles, they merely
wore the ordinary costume of their race—a slip of native cloth about
the loins. Indecorous as their behaviour was, these worthies turned out
to be a deputation from the reverend the clergy of the island; and the
object of their visit was to put our ship under a rigorous “Taboo,” to
prevent the disorderly scenes and facilities for desertion which would
ensue, were the natives—men and women—allowed to come off to us freely.

There was little ceremony about the matter. The priests went aside for
a moment, laid their shaven old crowns together, and went over a little
mummery. Whereupon, their leader tore a long strip from his girdle of
white tappa, and handed it to one of the French officers, who, after
explaining what was to be done, gave it to Jermin. The mate at once
went out to the end of the flying jib boom, and fastened there the
mystic symbol of the ban. This put to flight a party of girls who had
been observed swimming toward us. Tossing their arms about, and
splashing the water like porpoises, with loud cries of “taboo! taboo!”
they turned about and made for the shore.

The night of our arrival, the mate and the Mowree were to stand “watch
and watch,” relieving each other every four hours; the crew, as is
sometimes customary when lying at an anchor, being allowed to remain
all night below. A distrust of the men, however, was, in the present
instance, the principal reason for this proceeding. Indeed, it was all
but certain, that some kind of attempt would be made at desertion; and
therefore, when Jermin’s first watch came on at eight bells
(midnight)—by which time all was quiet—he mounted to the deck with a
flask of spirits in one hand, and the other in readiness to assail the
first countenance that showed itself above the forecastle scuttle.

Thus prepared, he doubtless meant to stay awake; but for all that, he
before long fell asleep; and slept with such hearty good-will too, that
the men who left us that night might have been waked up by his snoring.
Certain it was, the mate snored most strangely; and no wonder, with
that crooked bugle of his. When he came to himself it was just dawn,
but quite light enough to show two boats gone from the side. In an
instant he knew what had happened.

Dragging the Mowree out of an old sail where he was napping, he ordered
him to clear away another boat, and then darted into the cabin to tell
the captain the news. Springing on deck again, he drove down into the
forecastle for a couple of oarsmen, but hardly got there before there
was a cry, and a loud splash heard over the side. It was the Mowree and
the boat—into which he had just leaped to get ready for
lowering—rolling over and over in the water.

The boat having at nightfall been hoisted up to its place over the
starboard quarter, someone had so cut the tackles which held it there,
that a moderate strain would at once part them. Bembo’s weight had
answered the purpose, showing that the deserters must have ascertained
his specific gravity to a fibre of hemp. There was another boat
remaining; but it was as well to examine it before attempting to lower.
And it was well they did; for there was a hole in the bottom large
enough to drop a barrel through: she had been scuttled most ruthlessly.

Jermin was frantic. Dashing his hat upon deck, he was about to plunge
overboard and swim to the corvette for a cutter, when Captain Guy made
his appearance and begged him to stay where he was. By this time the
officer of the deck aboard the Frenchman had noticed our movements, and
hailed to know what had happened. Guy informed him through his trumpet,
and men to go in pursuit were instantly promised. There was a whistling
of a boatswain’s pipe, an order or two, and then a large cutter pulled
out from the man-of-war’s stern, and in half a dozen strokes was
alongside. The mate leaped into her, and they pulled rapidly ashore.

Another cutter, carrying an armed crew, soon followed.

In an hour’s time the first returned, towing the two whale-boats, which
had been found turned up like tortoises on the beach.

Noon came, and nothing more was heard from the deserters. Meanwhile
Doctor Long Ghost and myself lounged about, cultivating an
acquaintance, and gazing upon the shore scenery. The bay was as calm as
death; the sun high and hot; and occasionally a still gliding canoe
stole out from behind the headlands, and shot across the water.

And all the morning long our sick men limped about the deck, casting
wistful glances inland, where the palm-trees waved and beckoned them
into their reviving shades. Poor invalid rascals! How conducive to the
restoration of their shattered health would have been those delicious
groves! But hard-hearted Jermin assured them, with an oath, that foot
of theirs should never touch the beach.

Toward sunset a crowd was seen coming down to the water. In advance of
all were the fugitives—bareheaded—their frocks and trousers hanging in
tatters, every face covered with blood and dust, and their arms
pinioned behind them with green thongs. Following them up, was a
shouting rabble of islanders, pricking them with the points of their
long spears, the party from the corvette menacing them in flank with
their naked cutlasses.

The bonus of a musket to the King of the Bay, and the promise of a
tumblerful of powder for every man caught, had set the whole population
on their track; and so successful was the hunt, that not only were that
morning’s deserters brought back, but five of those left behind on a
former visit. The natives, however, were the mere hounds of the chase,
raising the game in their coverts, but leaving the securing of it to
the Frenchmen. Here, as elsewhere, the islanders have no idea of taking
part in such a scuffle as ensues upon the capture of a party of
desperate seamen.

The runaways were at once brought aboard, and, though they looked
rather sulky, soon came round, and treated the whole affair as a
frolicsome adventure.




CHAPTER VI.
WE TOUCH AT LA DOMINICA


Fearful of spending another night at Hytyhoo, Captain Guy caused the
ship to be got under way shortly after dark.

The next morning, when all supposed that we were fairly embarked for a
long cruise, our course was suddenly altered for La Dominica, or
Hivarhoo, an island just north of the one we had quitted. The object of
this, as we learned, was to procure, if possible, several English
sailors, who, according to the commander of the corvette, had recently
gone ashore there from an American whaler, and were desirous of
shipping aboard one of their own country vessels.

We made the land in the afternoon, coming abreast of a shady glen
opening from a deep bay, and winding by green denies far out of sight.
“Hands by the weather-main-brace!” roared the mate, jumping up on the
bulwarks; and in a moment the prancing Julia, suddenly arrested in her
course, bridled her head like a steed reined in, while the foam flaked
under her bows.

This was the place where we expected to obtain the men; so a boat was
at once got in readiness to go ashore. Now it was necessary to provide
a picked crew—men the least likely to abscond. After considerable
deliberation on the part of the captain and mate, four of the seamen
were pitched upon as the most trustworthy; or rather they were selected
from a choice assortment of suspicious characters as being of an
inferior order of rascality.

Armed with cutlasses all round—the natives were said to be an ugly
set—they were followed over the side by the invalid captain, who, on
this occasion, it seems, was determined to signalize himself.
Accordingly, in addition to his cutlass, he wore an old boarding belt,
in which was thrust a brace of pistols. They at once shoved off.

My friend Long Ghost had, among other things which looked somewhat
strange in a ship’s forecastle, a capital spy-glass, and on the present
occasion we had it in use.

When the boat neared the head of the inlet, though invisible to the
naked eye, it was plainly revealed by the glass; looking no bigger than
an egg-shell, and the men diminished to pigmies.

At last, borne on what seemed a long flake of foam, the tiny craft shot
up the beach amid a shower of sparkles. Not a soul was there. Leaving
one of their number by the water, the rest of the pigmies stepped
ashore, looking about them very circumspectly, pausing now and then
hand to ear, and peering under a dense grove which swept down within a
few paces of the sea. No one came, and to all appearances everything
was as still as the grave. Presently he with the pistols, followed by
the rest flourishing their bodkins, entered the wood and were soon lost
to view. They did not stay long; probably anticipating some
inhospitable ambush were they to stray any distance up the glen.

In a few moments they embarked again, and were soon riding pertly over
the waves of the bay. All of a sudden the captain started to his
feet—the boat spun round, and again made for the shore. Some twenty or
thirty natives armed with spears which through the glass looked like
reeds, had just come out of the grove, and were apparently shouting to
the strangers not to be in such a hurry, but return and be sociable.
But they were somewhat distrusted, for the boat paused about its length
from the beach, when the captain standing up in its head delivered an
address in pantomime, the object of which seemed to be, that the
islanders should draw near. One of them stepped forward and made
answer, seemingly again urging the strangers not to be diffident, but
beach their boat. The captain declined, tossing his arms about in
another pantomime. In the end he said something which made them shake
their spears; whereupon he fired a pistol among them, which set the
whole party running; while one poor little fellow, dropping his spear
and clapping his hand behind him, limped away in a manner which almost
made me itch to get a shot at his assailant.

Wanton acts of cruelty like this are not unusual on the part of sea
captains landing at islands comparatively unknown. Even at the Pomotu
group, but a day’s sail from Tahiti, the islanders coming down to the
shore have several times been fired at by trading schooners passing
through their narrow channels; and this too as a mere amusement on the
part of the ruffians.

Indeed, it is almost incredible, the light in which many sailors regard
these naked heathens. They hardly consider them human. But it is a
curious fact, that the more ignorant and degraded men are, the more
contemptuously they look upon those whom they deem their inferiors.

All powers of persuasion being thus lost upon these foolish savages,
and no hope left of holding further intercourse, the boat returned to
the ship.




CHAPTER VII.
WHAT HAPPENED AT HANNAMANOO


On the other side of the island was the large and populous bay of
Hannamanoo, where the men sought might yet be found. But as the sun was
setting by the time the boat came alongside, we got our offshore tacks
aboard and stood away for an offing. About daybreak we wore, and ran
in, and by the time the sun was well up, entered the long, narrow
channel dividing the islands of La Dominica and St. Christina.

On one hand was a range of steep green bluffs hundreds of feet high,
the white huts of the natives here and there nestling like birds’ nests
in deep clefts gushing with verdure. Across the water, the land rolled
away in bright hillsides, so warm and undulating that they seemed
almost to palpitate in the sun. On we swept, past bluff and grove,
wooded glen and valley, and dark ravines lighted up far inland with
wild falls of water. A fresh land-breeze filled our sails, the embayed
waters were gentle as a lake, and every wave broke with a tinkle
against our coppered prow.

On gaining the end of the channel we rounded a point, and came full
upon the bay of Hannamanoo. This is the only harbour of any note about
the island, though as far as a safe anchorage is concerned it hardly
deserves the title.

Before we held any communication with the shore, an incident occurred
which may convey some further idea of the character of our crew.

Having approached as near the land as we could prudently, our headway
was stopped, and we awaited the arrival of a canoe which was coming out
of the bay. All at once we got into a strong current, which swept us
rapidly toward a rocky promontory forming one side of the harbour. The
wind had died away; so two boats were at once lowered for the purpose
of pulling the ship’s head round. Before this could be done, the eddies
were whirling upon all sides, and the rock so near that it seemed as if
one might leap upon it from the masthead. Notwithstanding the
speechless fright of the captain, and the hoarse shouts of the
unappalled Jennin, the men handled the ropes as deliberately as
possible, some of them chuckling at the prospect of going ashore, and
others so eager for the vessel to strike, that they could hardly
contain themselves. Unexpectedly a countercurrent befriended us, and
assisted by the boats we were soon out of danger.

What a disappointment for our crew! All their little plans for swimming
ashore from the wreck, and having a fine time of it for the rest of
their days, thus cruelly nipped in the bud.

Soon after, the canoe came alongside. In it were eight or ten natives,
comely, vivacious-looking youths, all gesture and exclamation; the red
feathers in their head-bands perpetually nodding. With them also came a
stranger, a renegade from Christendom and humanity—a white man, in the
South Sea girdle, and tattooed in the face. A broad blue band stretched
across his face from ear to ear, and on his forehead was the taper
figure of a blue shark, nothing but fins from head to tail.

Some of us gazed upon this man with a feeling akin to horror, no ways
abated when informed that he had voluntarily submitted to this
embellishment of his countenance. What an impress! Far worse than
Cain’s—his was perhaps a wrinkle, or a freckle, which some of our
modern cosmetics might have effaced; but the blue shark was a mark
indelible, which all the waters of Abana and Pharpar, rivers of
Damascus, could never wash out. He was an Englishman, Lem Hardy he
called himself, who had deserted from a trading brig touching at the
island for wood and water some ten years previous. He had gone ashore
as a sovereign power armed with a musket and a bag of ammunition, and
ready if need were, to prosecute war on his own account. The country
was divided by the hostile kings of several large valleys. With one of
them, from whom he first received overtures, he formed an alliance, and
became what he now was, the military leader of the tribe, and war-god
of the entire island.

His campaigns beat Napoleon’s. In one night attack, his invincible
musket, backed by the light infantry of spears and javelins, vanquished
two clans, and the next morning brought all the others to the feet of
his royal ally.

Nor was the rise of his domestic fortunes at all behind the Corsican’s:
three days after landing, the exquisitely tattooed hand of a princess
was his; receiving along with the damsel as her portion, one thousand
fathoms of fine tappa, fifty double-braided mats of split grass, four
hundred hogs, ten houses in different parts of her native valley, and
the sacred protection of an express edict of the Taboo, declaring his
person inviolable for ever.

Now, this man was settled for life, perfectly satisfied with his
circumstances, and feeling no desire to return to his friends.

“Friends,” indeed, he had none. He told me his history. Thrown upon the
world a foundling, his paternal origin was as much a mystery to him as
the genealogy of Odin; and, scorned by everybody, he fled the parish
workhouse when a boy, and launched upon the sea. He had followed it for
several years, a dog before the mast, and now he had thrown it up for
ever.

And for the most part, it is just this sort of men—so many of whom are
found among sailors—uncared for by a single soul, without ties,
reckless, and impatient of the restraints of civilization, who are
occasionally found quite at home upon the savage islands of the
Pacific. And, glancing at their hard lot in their own country, what
marvel at their choice?

According to the renegado, there was no other white man on the island;
and as the captain could have no reason to suppose that Hardy intended
to deceive us, he concluded that the Frenchmen were in some way or
other mistaken in what they had told us. However, when our errand was
made known to the rest of our visitors, one of them, a fine, stalwart
fellow, his face all eyes and expression, volunteered for a cruise. All
the wages he asked was a red shirt, a pair of trousers, and a hat,
which were to be put on there and then; besides a plug of tobacco and a
pipe. The bargain was struck directly; but Wymontoo afterward came in
with a codicil, to the effect that a friend of his, who had come along
with him, should be given ten whole sea-biscuits, without crack or
flaw, twenty perfectly new and symmetrically straight nails, and one
jack-knife. This being agreed to, the articles were at once handed
over; the native receiving them with great avidity, and in the absence
of clothing, using his mouth as a pocket to put the nails in. Two of
them, however, were first made to take the place of a pair of
ear-ornaments, curiously fashioned out of bits of whitened wood.

It now began breezing strongly from seaward, and no time was to be lost
in getting away from the land; so after an affecting rubbing of noses
between our new shipmate and his countrymen, we sailed away with him.

To our surprise, the farewell shouts from the canoe, as we dashed along
under bellied royals, were heard unmoved by our islander; but it was
not long thus. That very evening, when the dark blue of his native
hills sunk in the horizon, the poor savage leaned over the bulwarks,
dropped his head upon his chest, and gave way to irrepressible
emotions. The ship was plunging hard, and Wymontoo, sad to tell, in
addition to his other pangs, was terribly sea-sick.




CHAPTER VIII.
THE TATTOOERS OF LA DOMINICA


For a while leaving Little Jule to sail away by herself, I will here
put down some curious information obtained from Hardy.

The renegado had lived so long on the island that its customs were
quite familiar; and I much lamented that, from the shortness of our
stay, he could not tell us more than he did.

From the little intelligence gathered, however, I learned to my
surprise that, in some things, the people of Hivarhoo, though of the
same group of islands, differed considerably from my tropical friends
in the valley of Typee.

As his tattooing attracted so much remark, Hardy had a good deal to say
concerning the manner in which that art was practised upon the island.

Throughout the entire cluster the tattooers of Hivarhoo enjoyed no
small reputation. They had carried their art to the highest perfection,
and the profession was esteemed most honourable. No wonder, then, that
like genteel tailors, they rated their services very high; so much so
that none but those belonging to the higher classes could afford to
employ them. So true was this, that the elegance of one’s tattooing was
in most cases a sure indication of birth and riches.

Professors in large practice lived in spacious houses, divided by
screens of tappa into numerous little apartments, where subjects were
waited upon in private. The arrangement chiefly grew out of a singular
ordinance of the Taboo, which enjoined the strictest privacy upon all
men, high and low, while under the hands of a tattooer. For the time,
the slightest intercourse with others is prohibited, and the small
portion of food allowed is pushed under the curtain by an unseen hand.
The restriction with regard to food, is intended to reduce the blood,
so as to diminish the inflammation consequent upon puncturing the skin.
As it is, this comes on very soon, and takes some time to heal; so that
the period of seclusion generally embraces many days, sometimes several
weeks.

All traces of soreness vanished, the subject goes abroad; but only
again to return; for, on account of the pain, only a small surface can
be operated upon at once; and as the whole body is to be more or less
embellished by a process so slow, the studios alluded to are constantly
filled. Indeed, with a vanity elsewhere unheard of, many spend no small
portion of their days thus sitting to an artist.

To begin the work, the period of adolescence is esteemed the most
suitable. After casting about for some eminent tattooer, the friends of
the youth take him to his house to have the outlines of the general
plan laid out. It behoves the professor to have a nice eye, for a suit
to be worn for life should be well cut.

Some tattooers, yearning after perfection, employ, at large wages, one
or two men of the commonest order—vile fellows, utterly regardless of
appearances, upon whom they first try their patterns and practise
generally. Their backs remorselessly scrawled over, and no more canvas
remaining, they are dismissed and ever after go about, the scorn of
their countrymen.

Hapless wights! thus martyred in the cause of the Fine Arts.

Beside the regular practitioners, there are a parcel of shabby,
itinerant tattooers, who, by virtue of their calling, stroll unmolested
from one hostile bay to another, doing their work dog-cheap for the
multitude. They always repair to the various religious festivals, which
gather great crowds. When these are concluded, and the places where
they are held vacated even by the tattooers, scores of little tents of
coarse tappa are left standing, each with a solitary inmate, who,
forbidden to talk to his unseen neighbours, is obliged to stay there
till completely healed. The itinerants are a reproach to their
profession, mere cobblers, dealing in nothing but jagged lines and
clumsy patches, and utterly incapable of soaring to those heights of
fancy attained by the gentlemen of the faculty.

All professors of the arts love to fraternize; and so, in Hannamanoo,
the tattooers came together in the chapters of their worshipful order.
In this society, duly organized, and conferring degrees, Hardy, from
his influence as a white, was a sort of honorary Grand Master. The blue
shark, and a sort of Urim and Thummim engraven upon his chest, were the
seal of his initiation. All over Hivarhoo are established these orders
of tattooers. The way in which the renegado’s came to be founded is
this. A year or two after his landing there happened to be a season of
scarcity, owing to the partial failure of the breadfruit harvest for
several consecutive seasons. This brought about such a falling off in
the number of subjects for tattooing that the profession became quite
needy. The royal ally of Hardy, however, hit upon a benevolent
expedient to provide for their wants, at the same time conferring a
boon upon many of his subjects.

By sound of conch-shell it was proclaimed before the palace, on the
beach, and at the head of the valley, that Noomai, King of Hannamanoo,
and friend of Hardee-Hardee, the white, kept open heart and table for
all tattooers whatsoever; but to entitle themselves to this
hospitality, they were commanded to practise without fee upon the
meanest native soliciting their services.

Numbers at once flocked to the royal abode, both artists and sitters.
It was a famous time; and the buildings of the palace being “taboo” to
all but the tattooers and chiefs, the sitters bivouacked on the common,
and formed an extensive encampment.

The “Lora Tattoo,” or the Time of Tattooing, will be long remembered.
An enthusiastic sitter celebrated the event in verse. Several lines
were repeated to us by Hardy, some of which, in a sort of colloquial
chant he translated nearly thus:

“Where is that sound?
In Hannamanoo.
And wherefore that sound?
The sound of a hundred hammers,
Tapping, tapping, tapping
The shark teeth.”

“Where is that light?
Round about the king’s house,
And the small laughter?
The small, merry laughter it is
Of the sons and daughters of the tattooed.”




CHAPTER IX.
WE STEER TO THE WESTWARD—STATE OF AFFAIRS


The night we left Hannamanoo was bright and starry, and so warm that,
when the watches were relieved, most of the men, instead of going
below, flung themselves around the foremast.

Toward morning, finding the heat of the forecastle unpleasant, I
ascended to the deck where everything was noiseless. The Trades were
blowing with a mild, steady strain upon the canvas, and the ship
heading right out into the immense blank of the Western Pacific. The
watch were asleep. With one foot resting on the rudder, even the man at
the helm nodded, and the mate himself, with arms folded, was leaning
against the capstan.

On such a night, and all alone, reverie was inevitable. I leaned over
the side, and could not help thinking of the strange objects we might
be sailing over.

But my meditations were soon interrupted by a gray, spectral shadow
cast over the heaving billows. It was the dawn, soon followed by the
first rays of the morning. They flashed into view at one end of the
arched night, like—to compare great things with small—the gleamings of
Guy Fawkes’s lantern in the vaults of the Parliament House. Before
long, what seemed a live ember rested for a moment on the rim of the
ocean, and at last the blood-red sun stood full and round in the level
East, and the long sea-day began.

Breakfast over, the first thing attended to was the formal baptism of
Wymontoo, who, after thinking over his affairs during the night, looked
dismal enough.

There were various opinions as to a suitable appellation. Some
maintained that we ought to call him “Sunday,” that being the day we
caught him; others, “Eighteen Forty-two,” the then year of our Lord;
while Doctor Long Ghost remarked that he ought, by all means, to retain
his original name,—Wymontoo-Hee, meaning (as he maintained), in the
figurative language of the island, something analogous to one who had
got himself into a scrape. The mate put an end to the discussion by
sousing the poor fellow with a bucket of salt water, and bestowing upon
him the nautical appellation of “Luff.”

Though a certain mirthfulness succeeded his first pangs at leaving
home, Wymontoo—we will call him thus—gradually relapsed into his former
mood, and became very melancholy. Often I noticed him crouching apart
in the forecastle, his strange eyes gleaming restlessly, and watching
the slightest movement of the men. Many a time he must have been
thinking of his bamboo hut, when they were talking of Sydney and its
dance-houses.

We were now fairly at sea, though to what particular cruising-ground we
were going, no one knew; and, to all appearances, few cared. The men,
after a fashion of their own, began to settle down into the routine of
sea-life, as if everything was going on prosperously. Blown along over
a smooth sea, there was nothing to do but steer the ship, and relieve
the “look-outs” at the mast-heads. As for the sick, they had two or
three more added to their number—the air of the island having disagreed
with the constitutions of several of the runaways. To crown all, the
captain again relapsed, and became quite ill.

The men fit for duty were divided into two small watches, headed
respectively by the mate and the Mowree; the latter by virtue of his
being a harpooner, succeeding to the place of the second mate, who had
absconded.

In this state of things whaling was out of the question; but in the
face of everything, Jermin maintained that the invalids would soon be
well. However that might be, with the same pale Hue sky overhead, we
kept running steadily to the westward. Forever advancing, we seemed
always in the same place, and every day was the former lived over
again. We saw no ships, expected to see none. No sign of life was
perceptible but the porpoises and other fish sporting under the bows
like pups ashore. But, at intervals, the gray albatross, peculiar to
these seas, came flapping his immense wings over us, and then skimmed
away silently as if from a plague-ship. Or flights of the tropic bird,
known among seamen as the “boatswain,” wheeled round and round us,
whistling shrilly as they flew.

The uncertainty hanging over our destination at this time, and the fact
that we were abroad upon waters comparatively little traversed, lent an
interest to this portion of the cruise which I shall never forget.

From obvious prudential considerations the Pacific has been principally
sailed over in known tracts, and this is the reason why new islands are
still occasionally discovered by exploring ships and adventurous
whalers notwithstanding the great number of vessels of all kinds of
late navigating this vast ocean. Indeed, considerable portions still
remain wholly unexplored; and there is doubt as to the actual existence
of certain shoals, and reefs, and small clusters of islands vaguely
laid down in the charts. The mere circumstance, therefore, of a ship
like ours penetrating into these regions, was sufficient to cause any
reflecting mind to feel at least a little uneasy. For my own part, the
many stories I had heard of ships striking at midnight upon unknown
rocks, with all sail set, and a slumbering crew, often recurred to me,
especially, as from the absence of discipline, and our being so
shorthanded, the watches at night were careless in the extreme.

But no thoughts like these were entertained by my reckless shipmates;
and along we went, the sun every evening setting right ahead of our jib
boom.

For what reason the mate was so reserved with regard to our precise
destination was never made known. The stories he told us, I, for one,
did not believe; deeming them all a mere device to lull the crew.

He said we were bound to a fine cruising ground, scarcely known to
other whalemen, which he had himself discovered when commanding a small
brig upon a former voyage. Here, the sea was alive with large whales,
so tame that all you had to do was to go up and kill them: they were
too frightened to resist. A little to leeward of this was a small
cluster of islands, where we were going to refit, abounding with
delicious fruits, and peopled by a race almost wholly unsophisticated
by intercourse with strangers.

In order, perhaps, to guard against the possibility of anyone finding
out the precise latitude and longitude of the spot we were going to,
Jermin never revealed to us the ship’s place at noon, though such is
the custom aboard of most vessels.

Meanwhile, he was very assiduous in his attention to the invalids.
Doctor Long Ghost having given up the keys of the medicine-chest, they
were handed over to him; and, as physician, he discharged his duties to
the satisfaction of all. Pills and powders, in most cases, were thrown
to the fish, and in place thereof, the contents of a mysterious little
quarter cask were produced, diluted with water from the “butt.” His
draughts were mixed on the capstan, in cocoa-nut shells marked with the
patients’ names. Like shore doctors, he did not eschew his own
medicines, for his professional calls in the forecastle were sometimes
made when he was comfortably tipsy: nor did he omit keeping his
invalids in good-humour, spinning his yarns to them, by the hour,
whenever he went to see them.

Owing to my lameness, from which I soon began to recover, I did no
active duty, except standing an occasional “trick” at the helm. It was
in the forecastle chiefly, that I spent my time, in company with the
Long Doctor, who was at great pains to make himself agreeable. His
books, though sadly torn and tattered, were an invaluable resource. I
read them through again and again, including a learned treatise on the
yellow fever. In addition to these, he had an old file of Sydney
papers, and I soon became intimately acquainted with the localities of
all the advertising tradesmen there. In particular, the rhetorical
flourishes of Stubbs, the real-estate auctioneer, diverted me
exceedingly, and I set him down as no other than a pupil of Robins the
Londoner.

Aside from the pleasure of his society, my intimacy with Long Ghost was
of great service to me in other respects. His disgrace in the cabin
only confirmed the good-will of the democracy in the forecastle; and
they not only treated him in the most friendly manner, but looked up to
him with the utmost deference, besides laughing heartily at all his
jokes. As his chosen associate, this feeling for him extended to me,
and gradually we came to be regarded in the light of distinguished
guests. At meal-times we were always first served, and otherwise were
treated with much respect.

Among other devices to kill time, during the frequent calms, Long Ghost
hit upon the game of chess. With a jack-knife, we carved the pieces
quite tastefully out of bits of wood, and our board was the middle of a
chest-lid, chalked into squares, which, in playing, we straddled at
either end. Having no other suitable way of distinguishing the sets, I
marked mine by tying round them little scarfs of black silk, torn from
an old neck-handkerchief. Putting them in mourning this way, the doctor
said, was quite appropriate, seeing that they had reason to feel sad
three games out of four. Of chess, the men never could make head nor
tail; indeed, their wonder rose to such a pitch that they at last
regarded the mysterious movements of the game with something more than
perplexity; and after puzzling over them through several long
engagements, they came to the conclusion that we must be a couple of
necromancers.




CHAPTER X.
A SEA-PARLOUR DESCRIBED, WITH SOME OF ITS TENANTS


I might as well give some idea of the place in which the doctor and I
lived together so sociably.

Most persons know that a ship’s forecastle embraces the forward part of
the deck about the bowsprit: the same term, however, is generally
bestowed upon the sailors’ sleeping-quarters, which occupy a space
immediately beneath, and are partitioned off by a bulkhead.

Planted right in the bows, or, as sailors say, in the very eyes of the
ship, this delightful apartment is of a triangular shape, and is
generally fitted with two tiers of rude bunks. Those of the Julia were
in a most deplorable condition, mere wrecks, some having been torn down
altogether to patch up others; and on one side there were but two
standing. But with most of the men it made little difference whether
they had a bunk or not, since, having no bedding, they had nothing to
put in it but themselves.

Upon the boards of my own crib I spread all the old canvas and old
clothes I could pick up. For a pillow, I wrapped an old jacket round a
log. This helped a little the wear and tear of one’s bones when the
ship rolled.

Rude hammocks made out of old sails were in many cases used as
substitutes for the demolished bunks; but the space they swung in was
so confined that they were far from being agreeable.

The general aspect of the forecastle was dungeon-like and dingy in the
extreme. In the first place, it was not five feet from deck to deck and
even this space was encroached upon by two outlandish cross-timbers
bracing the vessel, and by the sailors’ chests, over which you must
needs crawl in getting about. At meal-times, and especially when we
indulged in after-dinner chat, we sat about the chests like a parcel of
tailors.

In the middle of all were two square, wooden columns, denominated in
marine architecture “Bowsprit Bitts.” They were about a foot apart, and
between them, by a rusty chain, swung the forecastle lamp, burning day
and night, and forever casting two long black shadows. Lower down,
between the bitts, was a locker, or sailors’ pantry, kept in abominable
disorder, and sometimes requiring a vigorous cleaning and fumigation.

All over, the ship was in a most dilapidated condition; but in the
forecastle it looked like the hollow of an old tree going to decay. In
every direction the wood was damp and discoloured, and here and there
soft and porous. Moreover, it was hacked and hewed without mercy, the
cook frequently helping himself to splinters for kindling-wood from the
bitts and beams. Overhead, every carline was sooty, and here and there
deep holes were burned in them, a freak of some drunken sailors on a
voyage long previous.

From above, you entered by a plank, with two elects, slanting down from
the scuttle, which was a mere hole in the deck. There being no slide to
draw over in case of emergency, the tarpaulin temporarily placed there
was little protection from the spray heaved over the bows; so that in
anything of a breeze the place was miserably wet. In a squall, the
water fairly poured down in sheets like a cascade, swashing about, and
afterward spirting up between the chests like the jets of a fountain.

Such were our accommodations aboard of the Julia; but bad as they were,
we had not the undisputed possession of them. Myriads of cockroaches,
and regiments of rats disputed the place with us. A greater calamity
than this can scarcely befall a vessel in the South Seas.

So warm is the climate that it is almost impossible to get rid of them.
You may seal up every hatchway, and fumigate the hull till the smoke
forces itself out at the seams, and enough will survive to repeople the
ship in an incredibly short period. In some vessels, the crews of which
after a hard fight have given themselves up, as it were, for lost, the
vermin seem to take actual possession, the sailors being mere tenants
by sufferance. With Sperm Whalemen, hanging about the Line, as many of
them do for a couple of years on a stretch, it is infinitely worse than
with other vessels.

As for the Julia, these creatures never had such free and easy times as
they did in her crazy old hull; every chink and cranny swarmed with
them; they did not live among you, but you among them. So true was
this, that the business of eating and drinking was better done in the
dark than in the light of day.

Concerning the cockroaches, there was an extraordinary phenomenon, for
which none of us could ever account.

Every night they had a jubilee. The first symptom was an unusual
clustering and humming among the swarms lining the beams overhead, and
the inside of the sleeping-places. This was succeeded by a prodigious
coming and going on the part of those living out of sight Presently
they all came forth; the larger sort racing over the chests and planks;
winged monsters darting to and fro in the air; and the small fry
buzzing in heaps almost in a state of fusion.

On the first alarm, all who were able darted on deck; while some of the
sick who were too feeble, lay perfectly quiet—the distracted vermin
running over them at pleasure. The performance lasted some ten minutes,
during which no hive ever hummed louder. Often it was lamented by us
that the time of the visitation could never be predicted; it was liable
to come upon us at any hour of the night, and what a relief it was,
when it happened to fall in the early part of the evening.

Nor must I forget the rats: they did not forget me. Tame as Trenck’s
mouse, they stood in their holes peering at you like old grandfathers
in a doorway. Often they darted in upon us at meal-times, and nibbled
our food. The first time they approached Wymontoo, he was actually
frightened; but becoming accustomed to it, he soon got along with them
much better than the rest. With curious dexterity he seized the animals
by their legs, and flung them up the scuttle to find a watery grave.

But I have a story of my own to tell about these rats. One day the
cabin steward made me a present of some molasses, which I was so choice
of that I kept it hid away in a tin can in the farthest corner of my
bunk.. Faring as we did, this molasses dropped upon a biscuit was a
positive luxury, which I shared with none but the doctor, and then only
in private. And sweet as the treacle was, how could bread thus prepared
and eaten in secret be otherwise than pleasant?

One night our precious can ran low, and in canting it over in the dark,
something beside the molasses slipped out. How long it had been there,
kind Providence never revealed; nor were we over anxious to know; for
we hushed up the bare thought as quickly as possible. The creature
certainly died a luscious death, quite equal to Clarence’s in the butt
of Malmsey.




CHAPTER XI.
DOCTOR LONG GHOST A WAG—ONE OF HIS CAPERS


Grave though he was at times, Doctor Long Ghost was a decided wag.

Everyone knows what lovers of fun sailors are ashore—afloat, they are
absolutely mad after it. So his pranks were duly appreciated.

The poor old black cook! Unlashing his hammock for the night, and
finding a wet log fast asleep in it; and then waking in the morning
with his woolly head tarred. Opening his coppers, and finding an old
boot boiling away as saucy as could be, and sometimes cakes of pitch
candying in his oven.

Baltimore’s tribulations were indeed sore; there was no peace for him
day nor night. Poor fellow! he was altogether too good-natured. Say
what they will about easy-tempered people, it is far better, on some
accounts, to have the temper of a wolf. Whoever thought of taking
liberties with gruff Black Dan?

The most curious of the doctor’s jokes, was hoisting the men aloft by
the foot or shoulder, when they fell asleep on deck during the
night-watches.

Ascending from the forecastle on one occasion, he found every soul
napping, and forthwith went about his capers. Fastening a rope’s end to
each sleeper, he rove the lines through a number of blocks, and
conducted them all to the windlass; then, by heaving round cheerily, in
spite of cries and struggles, he soon had them dangling aloft in all
directions by arms and legs. Waked by the uproar, we rushed up from
below, and found the poor fellows swinging in the moonlight from the
tops and lower yard-arms, like a parcel of pirates gibbeted at sea by a
cruiser.

Connected with this sort of diversion was another prank of his. During
the night some of those on deck would come below to light a pipe, or
take a mouthful of beef and biscuit. Sometimes they fell asleep; and
being missed directly that anything was to be done, their shipmates
often amused themselves by running them aloft with a pulley dropped
down the scuttle from the fore-top.

One night, when all was perfectly still, I lay awake in the forecastle;
the lamp was burning low and thick, and swinging from its blackened
beam; and with the uniform motion of the ship, the men in the bunks
rolled slowly from side to side; the hammocks swaying in unison.

Presently I heard a foot upon the ladder, and looking up, saw a wide
trousers’ leg. Immediately, Navy Bob, a stout old Triton, stealthily
descended, and at once went to groping in the locker after something to
eat.

Supper ended, he proceeded to load his pipe. Now, for a good
comfortable smoke at sea, there never was a better place than the
Julia’s forecastle at midnight. To enjoy the luxury, one wants to fall
into a kind of dreamy reverie, only known to the children of the weed.
And the very atmosphere of the place, laden as it was with the snores
of the sleepers, was inducive of this. No wonder, then, that after a
while Bob’s head sunk upon his breast; presently his hat fell off, the
extinguished pipe dropped from his mouth, and the next moment he lay
out on the chest as tranquil as an infant.

Suddenly an order was heard on deck, followed by the trampling of feet
and the hauling of rigging. The yards were being braced, and soon after
the sleeper was missed: for there was a whispered conference over the
scuttle.

Directly a shadow glided across the forecastle and noiselessly
approached the unsuspecting Bob. It was one of the watch with the end
of a rope leading out of sight up the scuttle. Pausing an instant, the
sailor pressed softly the chest of his victim, sounding his slumbers;
and then hitching the cord to his ankle, returned to the deck.

Hardly was his back turned, when a long limb was thrust from a hammock
opposite, and Doctor Long Ghost, leaping forth warily, whipped the rope
from Bob’s ankle, and fastened it like lightning to a great lumbering
chest, the property of the man who had just disappeared.

Scarcely was the thing done, when lo! with a thundering bound, the
clumsy box was torn from its fastenings, and banging from side to side,
flew toward the scuttle. Here it jammed; and thinking that Bob, who was
as strong as a windlass, was grappling a beam and trying to cut the
line, the jokers on deck strained away furiously. On a sudden, the
chest went aloft, and striking against the mast, flew open, raining
down on the heads of a party the merciless shower of things too
numerous to mention.

Of course the uproar roused all hands, and when we hurried on deck,
there was the owner of the box, looking aghast at its scattered
contents, and with one wandering hand taking the altitude of a bump on
his head.




CHAPTER XII.
DEATH AND BURIAL OF TWO OF THE CREW


The mirthfulness which at times reigned among us was in strange and
shocking contrast with the situation of some of the invalids. Thus at
least did it seem to me, though not to others.

But an event occurred about this period, which, in removing by far the
most pitiable cases of suffering, tended to make less grating to my
feelings the subsequent conduct of the crew.

We had been at sea about twenty days, when two of the sick who had
rapidly grown worse, died one night within an hour of each other.

One occupied a bunk right next to mine, and for several days had not
risen from it. During this period he was often delirious, starting up
and glaring around him, and sometimes wildly tossing his arms.

On the night of his decease, I retired shortly after the middle watch
began, and waking from a vague dream of horrors, felt something clammy
resting on me. It was the sick man’s hand. Two or three times during
the evening previous, he had thrust it into my bunk, and I had quietly
removed it; but now I started and flung it from me. The arm fell stark
and stiff, and I knew that he was dead.

Waking the men, the corpse was immediately rolled up in the strips of
blanketing upon which it lay, and carried on deck. The mate was then
called, and preparations made for an instantaneous’ burial. Laying the
body out on the forehatch, it was stitched up in one of the hammocks,
some “kentledge” being placed at the feet instead of shot. This done,
it was borne to the gangway, and placed on a plank laid across the
bulwarks. Two men supported the inside end. By way of solemnity, the
ship’s headway was then stopped by hauling aback the main-top-sail.

The mate, who was far from being sober, then staggered up, and holding
on to a shroud, gave the word. As the plank tipped, the body slid off
slowly, and fell with a splash into the sea. A bubble or two, and
nothing more was seen.

“Brace forward!” The main-yard swung round to its place, and the ship
glided on, whilst the corpse, perhaps, was still sinking.

We had tossed a shipmate to the sharks, but no one would have thought
it, to have gone among the crew immediately after. The dead man had
been a churlish, unsocial fellow, while alive, and no favourite; and
now that he was no more, little thought was bestowed upon him. All that
was said was concerning the disposal of his chest, which, having been
always kept locked, was supposed to contain money. Someone volunteered
to break it open, and distribute its contents, clothing and all, before
the captain should demand it.

While myself and others were endeavouring to dissuade them from this,
all started at a cry from the forecastle. There could be no one there
but two of the sick, unable to crawl on deck. We went below, and found
one of them dying on a chest. He had fallen out of his hammock in a
fit, and was insensible. The eyes were open and fixed, and his breath
coming and going convulsively. The men shrunk from him; but the doctor,
taking his hand, held it a few moments in his, and suddenly letting it
fall, exclaimed, “He’s gone!” The body was instantly borne up the
ladder.

Another hammock was soon prepared, and the dead sailor stitched up as
before. Some additional ceremony, however, was now insisted upon, and a
Bible was called for. But none was to be had, not even a Prayer Book.
When this was made known, Antone, a Portuguese, from the Cape-de-Verd
Islands, stepped up, muttering something over the corpse of his
countryman, and, with his finger, described upon the back of the
hammock the figure of a large cross; whereupon it received the
death-launch.

These two men both perished from the proverbial indiscretions of
seamen, heightened by circumstances apparent; but had either of them
been ashore under proper treatment, he would, in all human probability,
have recovered.

Behold here the fate of a sailor! They give him the last toss, and no
one asks whose child he was.

For the rest of that night there was no more sleep. Many stayed on deck
until broad morning, relating to each other those marvellous tales of
the sea which the occasion was calculated to call forth. Little as I
believed in such things, I could not listen to some of these stories
unaffected. Above all was I struck by one of the carpenter’s.

On a voyage to India, they had a fever aboard, which carried off nearly
half the crew in the space of a few days. After this the men never went
aloft in the night-time, except in couples. When topsails were to be
reefed, phantoms were seen at the yard-arm ends; and in tacking ship,
voices called aloud from the tops. The carpenter himself, going with
another man to furl the main-top-gallant-sail in a squall, was nearly
pushed from the rigging by an unseen hand; and his shipmate swore that
a wet hammock was flirted in his face.

Stories like these were related as gospel truths, by those who declared
themselves eye-witnesses.

It is a circumstance not generally known, perhaps, that among ignorant
seamen, Philanders, or Finns, as they are more commonly called, are
regarded with peculiar superstition. For some reason or other, which I
never could get at, they are supposed to possess the gift of second
sight, and the power to wreak supernatural vengeance upon those who
offend them. On this account they have great influence among sailors,
and two or three with whom I have sailed at different times were
persons well calculated to produce this sort of impression, at least
upon minds disposed to believe in such things.

Now, we had one of these sea-prophets aboard; an old, yellow-haired
fellow, who always wore a rude seal-skin cap of his own make, and
carried his tobacco in a large pouch made of the same stuff. Van, as we
called him, was a quiet, inoffensive man, to look at, and, among such a
set, his occasional peculiarities had hitherto passed for nothing. At
this time, however, he came out with a prediction, which was none the
less remarkable from its absolute fulfilment, though not exactly in the
spirit in which it was given out.

The night of the burial he laid his hand on the old horseshoe nailed as
a charm to the foremast, and solemnly told us that, in less than three
weeks, not one quarter of our number would remain aboard the ship—by
that time they would have left her for ever.

Some laughed; Flash Jack called him an old fool; but among the men
generally it produced a marked effect. For several days a degree of
quiet reigned among us, and allusions of such a kind were made to
recent events, as could be attributed to no other cause than the Finn’s
omen.

For my own part, what had lately come to pass was not without its
influence. It forcibly brought to mind our really critical condition.
Doctor Long Ghost, too, frequently revealed his apprehensions, and once
assured me that he would give much to be safely landed upon any island
around us.

Where we were, exactly, no one but the mate seemed to know, nor whither
we were going. The captain—a mere cipher—was an invalid in his cabin;
to say nothing more of so many of his men languishing in the
forecastle.

Our keeping the sea under these circumstances, a matter strange enough
at first, now seemed wholly unwarranted; and added to all was the
thought that our fate was absolutely in the hand of the reckless
Jermin. Were anything to happen to him, we would be left without a
navigator, for, according to Jermin himself, he had, from the
commencement of the voyage, always kept the ship’s reckoning, the
captain’s nautical knowledge being insufficient.

But considerations like these, strange as it may seem, seldom or never
occurred to the crew. They were alive only to superstitious fears; and
when, in apparent contradiction to the Finn’s prophecy, the sick men
rallied a little, they began to recover their former spirits, and the
recollection of what had occurred insensibly faded from their minds. In
a week’s time, the unworthiness of Little Jule as a sea vessel, always
a subject of jest, now became more so than ever. In the forecastle,
Flash Jack, with his knife, often dug into the dank, rotten planks
ribbed between us and death, and flung away the splinters with some sea
joke.

As to the remaining invalids, they were hardly ill enough to occasion
any serious apprehension, at least for the present, in the breasts of
such thoughtless beings as themselves. And even those who suffered the
most, studiously refrained from any expression of pain.

The truth is, that among sailors as a class, sickness at sea is so
heartily detested, and the sick so little cared for, that the greatest
invalid generally strives to mask his sufferings. He has given no
sympathy to others, and he expects none in return. Their conduct, in
this respect, so opposed to their generous-hearted behaviour ashore,
painfully affects the landsman on his first intercourse with them as a
sailor.

Sometimes, but seldom, our invalids inveighed against their being kept
at sea, where they could be of no service, when they ought to be ashore
and in the way of recovery. But—“Oh! cheer up—cheer up, my
hearties!”—the mate would say. And after this fashion he put a stop to
their murmurings.

But there was one circumstance, to which heretofore I have but barely
alluded, that tended more than anything else to reconcile many to their
situation. This was the receiving regularly, twice every day, a certain
portion of Pisco, which was served out at the capstan, by the steward,
in little tin measures called “tots.”

The lively affection seamen have for strong drink is well known; but in
the South Seas, where it is so seldom to be had, a thoroughbred sailor
deems scarcely any price too dear which will purchase his darling
“tot.” Nowadays, American whalemen in the Pacific never think of
carrying spirits as a ration; and aboard of most of them, it is never
served out even in times of the greatest hardships. All Sydney
whalemen, however, still cling to the old custom, and carry it as a
part of the regular supplies for the voyage.

In port, the allowance of Pisco was suspended; with a view,
undoubtedly, of heightening the attractions of being out of sight of
land.

Now, owing to the absence of proper discipline, our sick, in addition
to what they took medicinally, often came in for their respective
“tots” convivially; and, added to all this, the evening of the last day
of the week was always celebrated by what is styled on board of English
vessels “The Saturday-night bottles.” Two of these were sent down into
the forecastle, just after dark; one for the starboard watch, and the
other for the larboard.

By prescription, the oldest seaman in each claims the treat as his,
and, accordingly, pours out the good cheer and passes it round like a
lord doing the honours of his table. But the Saturday-night bottles
were not all. The carpenter and cooper, in sea parlance, Chips and
Bungs, who were the “Cods,” or leaders of the forecastle, in some way
or other, managed to obtain an extra supply, which perpetually kept
them in fine after-dinner spirits, and, moreover, disposed them to look
favourably upon a state of affairs like the present.

But where were the sperm whales all this time? In good sooth, it made
little matter where they were, since we were in no condition to capture
them. About this time, indeed, the men came down from the mast-heads,
where, until now, they had kept up the form of relieving each other
every two hours. They swore they would go there no more. Upon this, the
mate carelessly observed that they would soon be where look-outs were
entirely unnecessary, the whales he had in his eye (though Flash Jack
said they were all in his) being so tame that they made a practice of
coming round ships, and scratching their backs against them.

Thus went the world of waters with us, some four weeks or more after
leaving Hannamanoo.




CHAPTER XIII.
OUR DESTINATION CHANGED


It was not long after the death of the two men, that Captain Guy was
reported as fast declining, and in a day or two more, as dying. The
doctor, who previously had refused to enter the cabin upon any
consideration, now relented, and paid his old enemy a professional
visit.

He prescribed a warm bath, which was thus prepared. The skylight being
removed, a cask was lowered down into the cabin, and then filled with
buckets of water from the ship’s coppers. The cries of the patient,
when dipped into his rude bath, were most painful to hear. They at last
laid him on the transom, more dead than alive.

That evening, the mate was perfectly sober, and coming forward to the
windlass, where we were lounging, summoned aft the doctor, myself, and
two or three others of his favourites; when, in the presence of Bembo
the Mowree, he spoke to us thus:

“I have something to say to ye, men. There’s none but Bembo here as
belongs aft, so I’ve picked ye out as the best men for’ard to take
counsel with, d’ye see, consarning the ship. The captain’s anchor is
pretty nigh atrip; I shouldn’t wonder if he croaked afore morning. So
what’s to be done? If we have to sew him up, some of those pirates
there for’ard may take it into their heads to run off with the ship,
because there’s no one at the tiller. Now, I’ve detarmined what’s best
to be done; but I don’t want to do it unless I’ve good men to back me,
and make things all fair and square if ever we get home again.”

We all asked what his plan was.

“I’ll tell ye what it is, men. If the skipper dies, all agree to obey
my orders, and in less than three weeks I’ll engage to have five
hundred barrels of sperm oil under hatches: enough to give every
mother’s son of ye a handful of dollars when we get to Sydney. If ye
don’t agree to this, ye won’t have a farthing coming to ye.”

Doctor Long Ghost at once broke in. He said that such a thing was not
to be dreamt of; that if the captain died, the mate was in duty bound
to navigate the ship to the nearest civilized port, and deliver her up
into an English consul’s hands; when, in all probability, after a run
ashore, the crew would be sent home. Everything forbade the mate’s
plan. “Still,” said he, assuming an air of indifference, “if the men
say stick it out, stick it out say I; but in that case, the sooner we
get to those islands of yours the better.”

Something more he went on to say; and from the manner in which the rest
regarded him, it was plain that our fate was in his hands. It was
finally resolved upon, that if Captain Guy was no better in twenty-four
hours, the ship’s head should be pointed for the island of Tahiti.

This announcement produced a strong sensation—the sick rallied—and the
rest speculated as to what was next to befall us; while the doctor,
without alluding to Guy, congratulated me upon the prospect of soon
beholding a place so famous as the island in question.

The night after the holding of the council, I happened to go on deck in
the middle watch, and found the yards braced sharp up on the larboard
tack, with the South East Trades strong on our bow. The captain was no
better; and we were off for Tahiti.




CHAPTER XIV.
ROPE YARN


While gliding along on our way, I cannot well omit some account of a
poor devil we had among us, who went by the name of Rope Yarn, or
Ropey.

He was a nondescript who had joined the ship as a landsman. Being so
excessively timid and awkward, it was thought useless to try and make a
sailor of him; so he was translated into the cabin as steward; the man
previously filling that post, a good seaman, going among the crew and
taking his place. But poor Ropey proved quite as clumsy among the
crockery as in the rigging; and one day when the ship was pitching,
having stumbled into the cabin with a wooden tureen of soup, he scalded
the officers so that they didn’t get over it in a week. Upon which, he
was dismissed, and returned to the forecastle.

Now, nobody is so heartily despised as a pusillanimous, lazy,
good-for-nothing land-lubber; a sailor has no bowels of compassion for
him. Yet, useless as such a character may be in many respects, a ship’s
company is by no means disposed to let him reap any benefit from his
deficiencies. Regarded in the light of a mechanical power, whenever
there is any plain, hard work to be done, he is put to it like a lever;
everyone giving him a pry.

Then, again, he is set about all the vilest work. Is there a heavy job
at tarring to be done, he is pitched neck and shoulders into a
tar-barrel, and set to work at it. Moreover, he is made to fetch and
carry like a dog. Like as not, if the mate sends him after his
quadrant, on the way he is met by the captain, who orders him to pick
some oakum; and while he is hunting up a bit of rope, a sailor comes
along and wants to know what the deuce he’s after, and bids him be off
to the forecastle.

“Obey the last order,” is a precept inviolable at sea. So the
land-lubber, afraid to refuse to do anything, rushes about distracted,
and does nothing: in the end receiving a shower of kicks and cuffs from
all quarters.

Added to his other hardships, he is seldom permitted to open his mouth
unless spoken to; and then, he might better keep silent. Alas for him!
if he should happen to be anything of a droll; for in an evil hour
should he perpetrate a joke, he would never know the last of it.

The witticisms of others, however, upon himself, must be received in
the greatest good-humour.

Woe be unto him, if at meal-times he so much as look sideways at the
beef-kid before the rest are helped.

Then he is obliged to plead guilty to every piece of mischief which the
real perpetrator refuses to acknowledge; thus taking the place of that
sneaking rascal nobody, ashore. In short, there is no end to his
tribulations.

The land-lubber’s spirits often sink, and the first result of his being
moody and miserable is naturally enough an utter neglect of his toilet.

The sailors perhaps ought to make allowances; but heartless as they
are, they do not. No sooner is his cleanliness questioned than they
rise upon him like a mob of the Middle Ages upon a Jew; drag him into
the lee-scuppers, and strip him to the buff. In vain he bawls for
mercy; in vain calls upon the captain to save him.

Alas! I say again, for the land-lubber at sea. He is the veriest wretch
the watery world over. And such was Rope Tarn; of all landlubbers, the
most lubberly and most miserable. A forlorn, stunted, hook-visaged
mortal he was too; one of those whom you know at a glance to have been
tried hard and long in the furnace of affliction. His face was an
absolute puzzle; though sharp and sallow, it had neither the wrinkles
of age nor the smoothness of youth; so that for the soul of me, I could
hardly tell whether he was twenty-five or fifty.

But to his history. In his better days, it seems he had been a
journeyman baker in London, somewhere about Holborn; and on Sundays
wore a Hue coat and metal buttons, and spent his afternoons in a
tavern, smoking his pipe and drinking his ale like a free and easy
journeyman baker that he was. But this did not last long; for an
intermeddling old fool was the ruin of him. He was told that London
might do very well for elderly gentlemen and invalids; but for a lad of
spirit, Australia was the Land of Promise. In a dark day Ropey wound up
his affairs and embarked.

Arriving in Sydney with a small capital, and after a while waxing snug
and comfortable by dint of hard kneading, he took unto himself a wife;
and so far as she was concerned, might then have gone into the country
and retired; for she effectually did his business. In short, the lady
worked him woe in heart and pocket; and in the end, ran off with his
till and his foreman. Ropey went to the sign of the Pipe and Tankard;
got fuddled; and over his fifth pot meditated suicide—an intention
carried out; for the next day he shipped as landsman aboard the Julia,
South Seaman.

The ex-baker would have fared far better, had it not been for his
heart, which was soft and underdone. A kind word made a fool of him;
and hence most of the scrapes he got into. Two or three wags, aware of
his infirmity, used to “draw him out” in conversation whenever the most
crabbed and choleric old seamen were present.

To give an instance. The watch below, just waked from their sleep, are
all at breakfast; and Ropey, in one corner, is disconsolately partaking
of its delicacies. “Now, sailors newly waked are no cherubs; and
therefore not a word is spoken, everybody munching his biscuit, grim
and unshaven. At this juncture an affable-looking scamp—Flash
Jack—crosses the forecastle, tin can in hand, and seats himself beside
the land-lubber.

“Hard fare this, Ropey,” he begins; “hard enough, too, for them that’s
known better and lived in Lun’nun. I say now, Ropey, s’posing you were
back to Holborn this morning, what would you have for breakfast, eh?”

“Have for breakfast!” cried Ropey in a rapture. “Don’t speak of it!”

“What ails that fellow?” here growled an old sea-bear, turning round
savagely.

“Oh, nothing, nothing,” said Jack; and then, leaning over to Rope Yarn,
he bade him go on, but speak lower.

“Well, then,” said he, in a smuggled tone, his eyes lighting up like
two lanterns, “well, then, I’d go to Mother Moll’s that makes the great
muffins: I’d go there, you know, and cock my foot on the ’ob, and call
for a noggin o’ somethink to begin with.”

“What then, Ropey?”

“Why then, Flashy,” continued the poor victim, unconsciously warming
with his theme: “why then, I’d draw my chair up and call for Betty, the
gal wot tends to customers. Betty, my dear, says I, you looks charmin’
this mornin’; give me a nice rasher of bacon and h’eggs, Betty my love;
and I wants a pint of h’ale, and three nice h’ot muffins and butter—and
a slice of Cheshire; and Betty, I wants—”

“A shark-steak, and be hanged to you!” roared Black Dan, with an oath.
Whereupon, dragged over the chests, the ill-starred fellow is pummelled
on deck.

I always made a point of befriending poor Ropey when I could; and, for
this reason, was a great favourite of his.




CHAPTER XV.
CHIPS AND BUNGS


Bound into port, Chips and Bungs increased their devotion to the
bottle; and, to the unspeakable envy of the rest, these jolly
companions—or “the Partners,” as the men called them—rolled about deck,
day after day, in the merriest mood imaginable.

But jolly as they were in the main, two more discreet tipplers it would
be hard to find. No one ever saw them take anything, except when the
regular allowance was served out by the steward; and to make them quite
sober and sensible, you had only to ask them how they contrived to keep
otherwise. Some time after, however, their secret leaked out.

The casks of Pisco were kept down the after-hatchway, which, for this
reason, was secured with bar and padlock. The cooper, nevertheless,
from time to time, effected a burglarious entry, by descending into the
fore-hold; and then, at the risk of being jammed to death, crawling
along over a thousand obstructions, to where the casks were stowed.

On the first expedition, the only one to be got at lay among others,
upon its bilge with the bung-hole well over. With a bit of iron hoop,
suitably bent, and a good deal of prying and punching, the bung was
forced in; and then the cooper’s neck-handkerchief, attached to the end
of the hoop, was drawn in and out—the absorbed liquor being
deliberately squeezed into a small bucket.

Bungs was a man after a barkeeper’s own heart. Drinking steadily, until
just manageably tipsy, he contrived to continue so; getting neither
more nor less inebriated, but, to use his own phrase, remaining “just
about right.” When in this interesting state, he had a free lurch in
his gait, a queer way of hitching up his waistbands, looked
unnecessarily steady at you when speaking, and for the rest, was in
very tolerable spirits. At these times, moreover, he was exceedingly
patriotic; and in a most amusing way, frequently showed his patriotism
whenever he happened to encounter Dunk, a good-natured, square-faced
Dane, aboard.

It must be known here, by the bye, that the cooper had a true sailor
admiration for Lord Nelson. But he entertained a very erroneous idea of
the personal appearance of the hero. Not content with depriving him of
an eye and an arm, he stoutly maintained that he had also lost a leg in
one of his battles. Under this impression, he sometimes hopped up to
Dunk with one leg curiously locked behind him into his right arm, at
the same time closing an eye.

In this attitude he would call upon him to look up, and behold the man
who gave his countrymen such a thrashing at Copenhagen. “Look you,
Dunk,” says he, staggering about, and winking hard with one eye to keep
the other shut, “Look you; one man—hang me, half a man—with one leg,
one arm, one eye—hang me, with only a piece of a carcase, flogged your
whole shabby nation. Do you deny it you lubber?”

The Dane was a mule of a man, and understanding but little English,
seldom made anything of a reply; so the cooper generally dropped his
leg, and marched off, with the air of a man who despised saying
anything further.




CHAPTER XVI.
WE ENCOUNTER A GALE


The mild blue weather we enjoyed after leaving the Marquesas gradually
changed as we ran farther south and approached Tahiti. In these
generally tranquil seas, the wind sometimes blows with great violence;
though, as every sailor knows, a spicy gale in the tropic latitudes of
the Pacific is far different from a tempest in the howling North
Atlantic. We soon found ourselves battling with the waves, while the
before mild Trades, like a woman roused, blew fiercely, but still
warmly, in our face.

For all this, the mate carried sail without stint; and as for brave
little Jule, she stood up to it well; and though once in a while
floored in the trough of a sea, sprang to her keel again and showed
play. Every old timber groaned—every spar buckled—every chafed cord
strained; and yet, spite of all, she plunged on her way like a racer.
Jermin, sea-jockey that he was, sometimes stood in the fore-chains,
with the spray every now and then dashing over him, and shouting out,
“Well done, Jule—dive into it, sweetheart. Hurrah!”

One afternoon there was a mighty queer noise aloft, which set the men
running in every direction. It was the main-t’-gallant-mast. Crash! it
broke off just above the cap, and held there by the rigging, dashed
with every roll from side to side, with all the hamper that belonged to
it. The yard hung by a hair, and at every pitch, thumped against the
cross-trees; while the sail streamed in ribbons, and the loose ropes
coiled, and thrashed the air, like whip-lashes. “Stand from under!” and
down came the rattling blocks, like so many shot. The yard, with a snap
and a plunge, went hissing into the sea, disappeared, and shot its full
length out again. The crest of a great wave then broke over it—the ship
rushed by—and we saw the stick no more.

While this lively breeze continued, Baltimore, our old black cook, was
in great tribulation.

Like most South Seamen, the Julia’s “caboose,” or cook-house, was
planted on the larboard side of the forecastle. Under such a press of
canvas, and with the heavy sea running the barque, diving her bows
under, now and then shipped green glassy waves, which, breaking over
the head-rails, fairly deluged that part of the ship, and washed clean
aft. The caboose-house—thought to be fairly lashed down to its
place—served as a sort of breakwater to the inundation.

About these times, Baltimore always wore what he called his “gale
suit,” among other things comprising a Sou’-wester and a huge pair of
well-anointed sea-boots, reaching almost to his knees. Thus equipped
for a ducking or a drowning, as the case might be, our culinary
high-priest drew to the slides of his temple, and performed his sooty
rites in secret.

So afraid was the old man of being washed overboard that he actually
fastened one end of a small line to his waistbands, and coiling the
rest about him, made use of it as occasion required. When engaged
outside, he unwound the cord, and secured one end to a ringbolt in the
deck; so that if a chance sea washed him off his feet, it could do
nothing more.

One evening just as he was getting supper, the Julia reared up on her
stern like a vicious colt, and when she settled again forward, fairly
dished a tremendous sea. Nothing could withstand it. One side of the
rotten head-bulwarks came in with a crash; it smote the caboose, tore
it from its moorings, and after boxing it about, dashed it against the
windlass, where it stranded. The water then poured along the deck like
a flood rolling over and over, pots, pans, and kettles, and even old
Baltimore himself, who went breaching along like a porpoise.

Striking the taffrail, the wave subsided, and washing from side to
side, left the drowning cook high and dry on the after-hatch: his
extinguished pipe still between his teeth, and almost bitten in two.

The few men on deck having sprung into the main-rigging, sailor-like,
did nothing but roar at his calamity.

The same night, our flying-jib-boom snapped off like a pipe-stem, and
our spanker-gaff came down by the run.

By the following morning, the wind in a great measure had gone down;
the sea with it; and by noon we had repaired our damages as well as we
could, and were sailing along as pleasantly as ever.

But there was no help for the demolished bulwarks; we had nothing to
replace them; and so, whenever it breezed again, our dauntless craft
went along with her splintered prow dripping, but kicking up her fleet
heels just as high as before.




CHAPTER XVII.
THE CORAL ISLANDS


How far we sailed to the westward after leaving the Marquesas, or what
might have been our latitude and longitude at any particular time, or
how many leagues we voyaged on our passage to Tahiti, are matters about
which, I am sorry to say, I cannot with any accuracy enlighten the
reader. Jermin, as navigator, kept our reckoning; and, as hinted
before, kept it all to himself. At noon, he brought out his quadrant, a
rusty old thing, so odd-looking that it might have belonged to an
astrologer.

Sometimes, when rather flustered from his potations, he went staggering
about deck, instrument to eye, looking all over for the sun—a
phenomenon which any sober observer might have seen right overhead. How
upon earth he contrived, on some occasions, to settle his latitude, is
more than I can tell. The longitude he must either have obtained by the
Rule of Three, or else by special revelation. Not that the chronometer
in the cabin was seldom to be relied on, or was any ways fidgety; quite
the contrary; it stood stock-still; and by that means, no doubt, the
true Greenwich time—at the period of stopping, at least—was preserved
to a second.

The mate, however, in addition to his “Dead Reckoning,” pretended to
ascertain his meridian distance from Bow Bells by an occasional lunar
observation. This, I believe, consists in obtaining with the proper
instruments the angular distance between the moon and some one of the
stars. The operation generally requires two observers to take sights,
and at one and the same time.

Now, though the mate alone might have been thought well calculated for
this, inasmuch as he generally saw things double, the doctor was
usually called upon to play a sort of second quadrant to Jermin’s
first; and what with the capers of both, they used to furnish a good
deal of diversion. The mate’s tremulous attempts to level his
instrument at the star he was after, were comical enough. For my own
part, when he did catch sight of it, I hardly knew how he managed to
separate it from the astral host revolving in his own brain.

However, by hook or by crook, he piloted us along; and before many
days, a fellow sent aloft to darn a rent in the fore-top-sail, threw
his hat into the air, and bawled out “Land, ho!”

Land it was; but in what part of the South Seas, Jermin alone knew, and
some doubted whether even he did. But no sooner was the announcement
made, than he came running on deck, spy-glass in hand, and clapping it
to his eye, turned round with the air of a man receiving indubitable
assurance of something he was quite certain of before. The land was
precisely that for which he had been steering; and, with a wind, in
less than twenty-four hours we would sight Tahiti. What he said was
verified.

The island turned out to be one of the Pomotu or Low Group—sometimes
called the Coral Islands—perhaps the most remarkable and interesting in
the Pacific. Lying to the east of Tahiti, the nearest are within a
day’s sail of that place.

They are very numerous; mostly small, low, and level; sometimes wooded,
but always covered with verdure. Many are crescent-shaped; others
resemble a horse-shoe in figure. These last are nothing more than
narrow circles of land surrounding a smooth lagoon, connected by a
single opening with the sea. Some of the lagoons, said to have
subterranean outlets, have no visible ones; the inclosing island, in
such cases, being a complete zone of emerald. Other lagoons still, are
girdled by numbers of small, green islets, very near to each other.

The origin of the entire group is generally ascribed to the coral
insect.

According to some naturalists, this wonderful little creature,
commencing its erections at the bottom of the sea, after the lapse of
centuries, carries them up to the surface, where its labours cease.
Here, the inequalities of the coral collect all floating bodies;
forming, after a time, a soil, in which the seeds carried thither by
birds germinate, and cover the whole with vegetation. Here and there,
all over this archipelago, numberless naked, detached coral formations
are seen, just emerging, as it were from the ocean. These would appear
to be islands in the very process of creation—at any rate, one
involuntarily concludes so, on beholding them.

As far as I know, there are but few bread-fruit trees in any part of
the Pomotu group. In many places the cocoa-nut even does not grow;
though, in others, it largely flourishes. Consequently, some of the
islands are altogether uninhabited; others support but a single family;
and in no place is the population very large. In some respects the
natives resemble the Tahitians: their language, too, is very similar.
The people of the southeasterly clusters—concerning whom, however, but
little is known—have a bad name as cannibals; and for that reason their
hospitality is seldom taxed by the mariner.

Within a few years past, missionaries from the Society group have
settled among the Leeward Islands, where the natives have treated them
kindly. Indeed, nominally, many of these people are now Christians;
and, through the political influence of their instructors, no doubt, a
short time since came tinder the allegiance of Pomaree, the Queen of
Tahiti; with which island they always carried on considerable
intercourse.

The Coral Islands are principally visited by the pearl-shell fishermen,
who arrive in small schooners, carrying not more than five or six men.

For a long while the business was engrossed by Merenhout, the French
Consul at Tahiti, but a Dutchman by birth, who, in one year, is said to
have sent to France fifty thousand dollars’ worth of shells. The
oysters are found in the lagoons, and about the reefs; and, for
half-a-dozen nails a day, or a compensation still less, the natives are
hired to dive after them.

A great deal of cocoa-nut oil is also obtained in various places. Some
of the uninhabited islands are covered with dense groves; and the
ungathered nuts which have fallen year after year, lie upon the ground
in incredible quantities. Two or three men, provided with the necessary
apparatus for trying out the oil, will, in the course of a week or two,
obtain enough to load one of the large sea-canoes.

Cocoa-nut oil is now manufactured in different parts of the South Seas,
and forms no small part of the traffic carried on with trading vessels.
A considerable quantity is annually exported from the Society Islands
to Sydney. It is used in lamps and for machinery, being much cheaper
than the sperm, and, for both purposes, better than the right-whale
oil. They bottle it up in large bamboos, six or eight feet long; and
these form part of the circulating medium of Tahiti.

To return to the ship. The wind dying away, evening came on before we
drew near the island. But we had it in view during the whole afternoon.

It was small and round, presenting one enamelled level, free from
trees, and did not seem four feet above the water. Beyond it was
another and larger island, about which a tropical sunset was throwing
its glories; flushing all that part of the heavens, and making it flame
like a vast dyed oriel illuminated.

The Trades scarce filled our swooning sails; the air was languid with
the aroma of a thousand strange, flowering shrubs. Upon inhaling it,
one of the sick, who had recently shown symptoms of scurvy, cried out
in pain, and was carried below. This is no unusual effect in such
instances.

On we glided, within less than a cable’s length of the shore which was
margined with foam that sparkled all round. Within, nestled the still,
blue lagoon. No living thing was seen, and, for aught we knew, we might
have been the first mortals who had ever beheld the spot. The thought
was quickening to the fancy; nor could I help dreaming of the endless
grottoes and galleries, far below the reach of the mariner’s lead.

And what strange shapes were lurking there! Think of those arch
creatures, the mermaids, chasing each other in and out of the coral
cells, and catching their long hair in the coral twigs!




CHAPTER XVIII.
TAHITI


At early dawn of the following morning we saw the Peaks of Tahiti. In
clear weather they may be seen at the distance of ninety miles.

“Hivarhoo!” shouted Wymontoo, overjoyed, and running out upon the
bowsprit when the land was first faintly descried in the distance. But
when the clouds floated away, and showed the three peaks standing like
obelisks against the sky; and the bold shore undulating along the
horizon, the tears gushed from his eyes. Poor fellow! It was not
Hivarhoo. Green Hivarhoo was many a long league off.

Tahiti is by far the most famous island in the South Seas; indeed, a
variety of causes has made it almost classic. Its natural features
alone distinguish it from the surrounding groups. Two round and lofty
promontories, whose mountains rise nine thousand feet above the level
of the ocean, are connected by a low, narrow isthmus; the whole being
some one hundred miles in circuit. From the great central peaks of the
larger peninsula—Orohena, Aorai, and Pirohitee—the land radiates on all
sides to the sea in sloping green ridges. Between these are broad and
shadowy valleys—in aspect, each a Tempe—watered with fine streams, and
thickly wooded. Unlike many of the other islands, there extends nearly
all round Tahiti a belt of low, alluvial soil, teeming with the richest
vegetation. Here, chiefly, the natives dwell.

Seen from the sea, the prospect is magnificent. It is one mass of
shaded tints of green, from beach to mountain top; endlessly
diversified with valleys, ridges, glens, and cascades. Over the ridges,
here and there, the loftier peaks fling their shadows, and far down the
valleys. At the head of these, the waterfalls flash out into the
sunlight, as if pouring through vertical bowers of verdure. Such
enchantment, too, breathes over the whole, that it seems a fairy world,
all fresh and blooming from the hand of the Creator.

Upon a near approach, the picture loses not its attractions. It is no
exaggeration to say that, to a European of any sensibility, who, for
the first time, wanders back into these valleys—away from the haunts of
the natives—the ineffable repose and beauty of the landscape is such,
that every object strikes him like something seen in a dream; and for a
time he almost refuses to believe that scenes like these should have a
commonplace existence. No wonder that the French bestowed upon the
island the appellation of the New Cytherea. “Often,” says De
Bourgainville, “I thought I was walking in the Garden of Eden.”

Nor, when first discovered, did the inhabitants of this charming
country at all diminish the wonder and admiration of the voyager. Their
physical beauty and amiable dispositions harmonized completely with the
softness of their clime. In truth, everything about them was calculated
to awaken the liveliest interest. Glance at their civil and religious
institutions. To their king, divine rights were paid; while for poetry,
their mythology rivalled that of ancient Greece.

Of Tahiti, earlier and more full accounts were given, than of any other
island in Polynesia; and this is the reason why it still retains so
strong a hold on the sympathies of all readers of South Sea voyages.
The journals of its first visitors, containing, as they did, such
romantic descriptions of a country and people before unheard of,
produced a marked sensation throughout Europe; and when the first
Tahitiana were carried thither, Omai in London, and Aotooroo in Paris,
were caressed by nobles, scholars, and ladies.

In addition to all this, several eventful occurrences, more or less
connected with Tahiti, have tended to increase its celebrity. Over two
centuries ago, Quiros, the Spaniard, is supposed to have touched at the
island; and at intervals, Wallis, Byron, Cook, De Bourgainville,
Vancouver, Le Perouse, and other illustrious navigators refitted their
vessels in its harbours. Here the famous Transit of Venus was observed,
in 1769. Here the memorable mutiny of the Bounty afterwards had its
origin. It was to the pagans of Tahiti that the first regularly
constituted Protestant missionaries were sent; and from their shores
also, have sailed successive missions to the neighbouring islands.

These, with other events which might be mentioned, have united in
keeping up the first interest which the place awakened; and the recent
proceedings of the French have more than ever called forth the
sympathies of the public.




CHAPTER XIX.
A SURPRISE—MORE ABOUT BEMBO


The sight of the island was right welcome. Going into harbour after a
cruise is always joyous enough, and the sailor is apt to indulge in all
sorts of pleasant anticipations. But to us, the occasion was heightened
by many things peculiar to our situation.

Since steering for the land, our prospects had been much talked over.
By many it was supposed that, should the captain leave the ship, the
crew were no longer bound by her articles. This was the opinion of our
forecastle Cokes; though, probably, it would not have been sanctioned
by the Marine Courts of Law. At any rate, such was the state of both
vessel and crew that, whatever might be the event, a long stay, and
many holidays in Tahiti, were confidently predicted.

Everybody was in high spirits. The sick, who had been improving day by
day since the change in our destination, were on deck, and leaning over
the bulwarks; some all animation, and others silently admiring an
object unrivalled for its stately beauty—Tahiti from the sea.

The quarter-deck, however, furnished a marked contrast to what was
going on at the other end of the ship. The Mowree was there, as usual,
scowling by himself; and Jermin walked to and fro in deep thought,
every now and then looking to windward, or darting into the cabin and
quickly returning.

With all our light sails wooingly spread, we held on our way, until,
with the doctor’s glass, Papeetee, the village metropolis of Tahiti,
came into view. Several ships were descried lying in the harbour, and
among them, one which loomed up black and large; her two rows of teeth
proclaiming a frigate. This was the Reine Blanche, last from the
Marquesas, and carrying at the fore the flag of Rear-Admiral Du Petit
Thouars. Hardly had we made her out, when the booming of her guns came
over the water. She was firing a salute, which afterwards turned out to
be in honour of a treaty; or rather—as far as the natives were
concerned—a forced cession of Tahiti to the French, that morning
concluded.

The cannonading had hardly died away, when Jermin’s voice was heard
giving an order so unexpected that everyone started. “Stand by to haul
back the main-yard!”

“What’s that mean?” shouted the men, “are we not going into port?”

“Tumble after here, and no words!” cried the mate; and in a moment the
main-yard swung round, when, with her jib-boom pointing out to sea, the
Julia lay as quiet as a duck. We all looked blank—what was to come
next?

Presently the steward made his appearance, carrying a mattress, which
he spread out in the stern-sheets of the captain’s boat; two or three
chests, and other things belonging to his master, were similarly
disposed of.

This was enough. A slight hint suffices for a sailor.

Still adhering to his resolution to keep the ship at sea in spite of
everything, the captain, doubtless, intended to set himself ashore,
leaving the vessel, under the mate, to resume her voyage at once; but
after a certain period agreed upon, to touch at the island, and take
him off. All this, of course, could easily be done without approaching
any nearer the land with the Julia than we now were. Invalid whaling
captains often adopt a plan like this; but, in the present instance, it
was wholly unwarranted; and, everything considered, at war with the
commonest principles of prudence and humanity. And, although, on Guy’s
part, this resolution showed more hardihood than he had ever been given
credit for, it, at the same time, argued an unaccountable simplicity,
in supposing that such a crew would, in any way, submit to the outrage.

It was soon made plain that we were right in our suspicions; and the
men became furious. The cooper and carpenter volunteered to head a
mutiny forthwith; and while Jermin was below, four or five rushed aft
to fasten down the cabin scuttle; others, throwing down the
main-braces, called out to the rest to lend a hand, and fill away for
the land. All this was done in an instant; and things were looking
critical, when Doctor Long Ghost and myself prevailed upon them to wait
a while, and do nothing hastily; there was plenty of time, and the ship
was completely in our power.

While the preparations were still going on in the cabin, we mustered
the men together, and went into counsel upon the forecastle.

It was with much difficulty that we could bring these rash spirits to a
calm consideration of the case. But the doctor’s influence at last
began to tell; and, with a few exceptions, they agreed to be guided by
him; assured that, if they did so, the ship would eventually be brought
to her anchors without anyone getting into trouble. Still they told us,
up and down, that if peaceable means failed, they would seize Little
Jule, and carry her into Papeetee, if they all swung for it; but, for
the present, the captain should have his own way.

By this time everything was ready; the boat was lowered and brought to
the gangway; and the captain was helped on deck by the mate and
steward. It was the first time we had seen him in more than two weeks,
and he was greatly altered. As if anxious to elude every eye, a
broad-brimmed Payata hat was pulled down over his brow; so that his
face was only visible when the brim flapped aside. By a sling, rigged
from the main-yard, the cook and Bembo now assisted in lowering him
into the boat. As he went moaning over the side, he must have heard the
whispered maledictions of his crew.

While the steward was busy adjusting matters in the boat, the mate,
after a private interview with the Mowree, turned round abruptly, and
told us that he was going ashore with the captain, to return as soon as
possible. In his absence, Bembo, as next in rank, would command; there
being nothing to do but keep the ship at a safe distance from the land.
He then sprang into the boat, and, with only the cook and steward as
oarsmen, steered for the shore.

Guy’s thus leaving the ship in the men’s hands, contrary to the mate’s
advice, was another evidence of his simplicity; for at this particular
juncture, had neither the doctor nor myself been aboard, there is no
telling what they might have done.

For the nonce, Bembo was captain; and, so far as mere seamanship was
concerned, he was as competent to command as anyone. In truth, a better
seaman never swore. This accomplishment, by the bye, together with a
surprising familiarity with most nautical names and phrases, comprised
about all the English he knew.

Being a harpooner, and, as such, having access to the cabin, this man,
though not yet civilized, was, according to sea usages, which know no
exceptions, held superior to the sailors; and therefore nothing was
said against his being left in charge of the ship; nor did it occasion
any surprise.

Some additional account must be given of Bembo. In the first place, he
was far from being liked. A dark, moody savage, everybody but the mate
more or less distrusted or feared him. Nor were these feelings
unreciprocated. Unless duty called, he seldom went among the crew. Hard
stories too were told about him; something, in particular, concerning
an hereditary propensity to kill men and eat them. True, he came from a
race of cannibals; but that was all that was known to a certainty.

Whatever unpleasant ideas were connected with the Mowree, his personal
appearance no way lessened them. Unlike most of his countrymen, he was,
if anything, below the ordinary height; but then, he was all compact,
and under his swart, tattooed skin, the muscles worked like steel rods.
Hair, crisp and coal-black, curled over shaggy brows, and ambushed
small, intense eyes, always on the glare. In short, he was none of your
effeminate barbarians.

Previous to this, he had been two or three voyages in Sydney whalemen;
always, however, as in the present instance, shipping at the Bay of
Islands, and receiving his discharge there on the homeward-bound
passage. In this way, his countrymen frequently enter on board the
colonial whaling vessels.

There was a man among us who had sailed with the Mowree on his first
voyage, and he told me that he had not changed a particle since then.

Some queer things this fellow told me. The following is one of his
stories. I give it for what it is worth; premising, however, that from
what I know of Bembo, and the foolhardy, dare-devil feats sometimes
performed in the sperm-whale fishery, I believe in its substantial
truth.

As may be believed, Bembo was a wild one after a fish; indeed, all New
Zealanders engaged in this business are; it seems to harmonize sweetly
with their blood-thirsty propensities. At sea, the best English they
speak is the South Seaman’s slogan in lowering away, “A dead whale, or
a stove boat!” Game to the marrow, these fellows are generally selected
for harpooners; a post in which a nervous, timid man would be rather
out of his element.

In darting, the harpooner, of course, stands erect in the head of the
boat, one knee braced against a support. But Bembo disdained this; and
was always pulled up to his fish, balancing himself right on the
gunwale.

But to my story. One morning, at daybreak, they brought him up to a
large, long whale. He darted his harpoon, and missed; and the fish
sounded. After a while, the monster rose again, about a mile off, and
they made after him. But he was frightened, or “gallied,” as they call
it; and noon came, and the boat was still chasing him. In whaling, as
long as the fish is in sight, and no matter what may have been
previously undergone, there is no giving up, except when night comes;
and nowadays, when whales are so hard to be got, frequently not even
then. At last, Bembo’s whale was alongside for the second time. He
darted both harpoons; but, as sometimes happens to the best men, by
some unaccountable chance, once more missed. Though it is well known
that such failures will happen at times, they, nevertheless, occasion
the bitterest disappointment to a boat’s crew, generally expressed in
curses both loud and deep. And no wonder. Let any man pull with might
and main for hours and hours together, under a burning sun; and if it
do not make him a little peevish, he is no sailor.

The taunts of the seamen may have maddened the Mowree; however it was,
no sooner was he brought up again, than, harpoon in hand, he bounded
upon the whale’s back, and for one dizzy second was seen there. The
next, all was foam and fury, and both were out of sight. The men
sheered off, flinging overboard the line as fast as they could; while
ahead, nothing was seen but a red whirlpool of blood and brine.

Presently, a dark object swam out; the line began to straighten; then
smoked round the loggerhead, and, quick as thought, the boat sped like
an arrow through the water. They were “fast,” and the whale was
running.

Where was the Mowree? His brown hand was on the boat’s gunwale; and he
was hauled aboard in the very midst of the mad bubbles that burst under
the bows.

Such a man, or devil, if you will, was Bembo.




CHAPTER XX.
THE ROUND ROBIN—VISITORS FROM SHORE


After the captain left, the land-breeze died away; and, as is usual
about these islands, toward noon it fell a dead calm. There was nothing
to do but haul up the courses, run down the jib, and lay and roll upon
the swells. The repose of the elements seemed to communicate itself to
the men; and for a time there was a lull.

Early in the afternoon, the mate, having left the captain at Papeetee,
returned to the ship. According to the steward, they were to go ashore
again right after dinner with the remainder of Guy’s effects.

On gaining the deck, Jermin purposely avoided us and went below without
saying a word. Meanwhile, Long Ghost and I laboured hard to diffuse the
right spirit among the crew; impressing upon them that a little
patience and management would, in the end, accomplish all that their
violence could; and that, too, without making a serious matter of it.

For my own part, I felt that I was under a foreign flag; that an
English consul was close at hand, and that sailors seldom obtain
justice. It was best to be prudent. Still, so much did I sympathize
with the men, so far, at least, as their real grievances were
concerned; and so convinced was I of the cruelty and injustice of what
Captain Guy seemed bent upon, that if need were, I stood ready to raise
a hand.

In spite of all we could do, some of them again became most refractory,
breathing nothing but downright mutiny. When we went below to dinner
these fellows stirred up such a prodigious tumult that the old hull
fairly echoed. Many, and fierce too, were the speeches delivered, and
uproarious the comments of the sailors. Among others Long Jim, or—as
the doctor afterwards called him—Lacedaemonian Jim, rose in his place,
and addressed the forecastle parliament in the following strain:

“Look ye, Britons! if after what’s happened, this here craft goes to
sea with us, we are no men; and that’s the way to say it. Speak the
word, my livelies, and I’ll pilot her in. I’ve been to Tahiti before
and I can do it.” Whereupon, he sat down amid a universal pounding of
chest-lids, and cymbaling of tin pans; the few invalids, who, as yet,
had not been actively engaged with the rest, now taking part in the
applause, creaking their bunk-boards and swinging their hammocks. Cries
also were heard, of “Handspikes and a shindy!” “Out stun-sails!”
“Hurrah!”

Several now ran on deck, and, for the moment, I thought it was all over
with us; but we finally succeeded in restoring some degree of quiet.

At last, by way of diverting their thoughts, I proposed that a “Round
Robin” should be prepared and sent ashore to the consul by Baltimore,
the cook. The idea took mightily, and I was told to set about it at
once. On turning to the doctor for the requisite materials, he told me
he had none; there was not a fly-leaf, even in any of his books. So,
after great search, a damp, musty volume, entitled “A History of the
most Atrocious and Bloody Piracies,” was produced, and its two
remaining blank leaves being torn out, were by help of a little pitch
lengthened into one sheet. For ink, some of the soot over the lamp was
then mixed with water, by a fellow of a literary turn; and an immense
quill, plucked from a distended albatross’ wing, which, nailed against
the bowsprit bitts, had long formed an ornament of the forecastle,
supplied a pen.

Making use of the stationery thus provided, I indited, upon a
chest-lid, a concise statement of our grievances; concluding with the
earnest hope that the consul would at once come off, and see how
matters stood for himself. Eight beneath the note was described the
circle about which the names were to be written; the great object of a
Round Robin being to arrange the signatures in such a way that,
although they are all found in a ring, no man can be picked out as the
leader of it.

Few among them had any regular names; many answering to some familiar
title, expressive of a personal trait; or oftener still, to the name of
the place from which they hailed; and in one or two cases were known by
a handy syllable or two, significant of nothing in particular but the
men who bore them. Some, to be sure, had, for the sake of formality,
shipped under a feigned cognomen, or “Purser’s name”; these, however,
were almost forgotten by themselves; and so, to give the document an
air of genuineness, it was decided that every man’s name should be put
down as it went among the crew.

It is due to the doctor to say that the circumscribed device was his.

Folded, and sealed with a drop of tar, the Round Robin was directed to
“The English Consul, Tahiti”; and, handed to the cook, was by him
delivered into that gentleman’s hands as soon as the mate went ashore.

On the return of the boat, sometime after dark, we learned a good deal
from old Baltimore, who, having been allowed to run about as much as he
pleased, had spent his time gossiping.

Owing to the proceedings of the French, everything in Tahiti was in an
uproar. Pritchard, the missionary consul, was absent in England; but
his place was temporarily filled by one Wilson, an educated white man,
born on the island, and the son of an old missionary of that name still
living.

With natives and foreigners alike, Wilson the younger was exceedingly
unpopular, being held an unprincipled and dissipated man, a character
verified by his subsequent conduct. Pritchard’s selecting a man like
this to attend to the duties of his office, had occasioned general
dissatisfaction ashore.

Though never in Europe or America, the acting consul had been several
voyages to Sydney in a schooner belonging to the mission; and therefore
our surprise was lessened, when Baltimore told us, that he and Captain
Guy were as sociable as could be—old acquaintances, in fact; and that
the latter had taken up his quarters at Wilson’s house. For us this
boded ill.

The mate was now assailed by a hundred questions as to what was going
to be done with us. His only reply was, that in the morning the consul
would pay us a visit, and settle everything.

After holding our ground off the harbour during the night, in the
morning a shore boat, manned by natives, was seen coming off. In it
were Wilson and another white man, who proved to be a Doctor Johnson,
an Englishman, and a resident physician of Papeetee.

Stopping our headway as they approached, Jermin advanced to the gangway
to receive them. No sooner did the consul touch the deck, than he gave
us a specimen of what he was.

“Mr. Jermin,” he cried loftily, and not deigning to notice the
respectful salutation of the person addressed, “Mr. Jermin, tack ship,
and stand off from the land.”

Upon this, the men looked hard at him, anxious to see what sort of a
looking “cove” he was. Upon inspection, he turned out to be an
exceedingly minute “cove,” with a viciously pugged nose, and a
decidedly thin pair of legs. There was nothing else noticeable about
him. Jermin, with ill-assumed suavity, at once obeyed the order, and
the ship’s head soon pointed out to sea.

Now, contempt is as frequently produced at first sight as love; and
thus was it with respect to Wilson. No one could look at him without
conceiving a strong dislike, or a cordial desire to entertain such a
feeling the first favourable opportunity. There was such an intolerable
air of conceit about this man that it was almost as much as one could
do to refrain from running up and affronting him.

“So the counsellor is come,” exclaimed Navy Bob, who, like all the
rest, invariably styled him thus, much to mine and the doctor’s
diversion. “Ay,” said another, “and for no good, I’ll be bound.”

Such were some of the observations made, as Wilson and the mate went
below conversing.

But no one exceeded the cooper in the violence with which he inveighed
against the ship and everything connected with her. Swearing like a
trooper, he called the main-mast to witness that, if he (Bungs) ever
again went out of sight of land in the Julia, he prayed Heaven that a
fate might be his—altogether too remarkable to be here related.

Much had he to say also concerning the vileness of what we had to
eat—not fit for a dog; besides enlarging upon the imprudence of
intrusting the vessel longer to a man of the mate’s intemperate habits.
With so many sick, too, what could we expect to do in the fishery? It
was no use talking; come what come might, the ship must let go her
anchor.

Now, as Bungs, besides being an able seaman, a “Cod” in the forecastle,
and about the oldest man in it, was, moreover, thus deeply imbued with
feelings so warmly responded to by the rest, he was all at once
selected to officiate as spokesman, as soon as the consul should see
fit to address us. The selection was made contrary to mine and the
doctor’s advice; however, all assured us they would keep quiet, and
hear everything Wilson had to say, before doing anything decisive.

We were not kept long in suspense; for very soon he was seen standing
in the cabin gangway, with the tarnished tin case containing the ship’s
papers; and Jennin at once sung out for the ship’s company to muster on
the quarter-deck.




CHAPTER XXI.
PROCEEDINGS OF THE CONSUL


The order was instantly obeyed, and the sailors ranged themselves,
facing the consul.

They were a wild company; men of many climes—not at all precise in
their toilet arrangements, but picturesque in their very tatters. My
friend, the Long Doctor, was there too; and with a view, perhaps, of
enlisting the sympathies of the consul for a gentleman in distress, had
taken more than ordinary pains with his appearance. But among the
sailors, he looked like a land-crane blown off to sea, and consorting
with petrels.

The forlorn Rope Yarn, however, was by far the most remarkable figure.
Land-lubber that he was, his outfit of sea-clothing had long since been
confiscated; and he was now fain to go about in whatever he could pick
up. His upper garment—an unsailor-like article of dress which he
persisted in wearing, though torn from his back twenty times in the
day—was an old “claw-hammer jacket,” or swallow-tail coat, formerly
belonging to Captain Guy, and which had formed one of his perquisites
when steward.

By the side of Wilson was the mate, bareheaded, his gray locks lying in
rings upon his bronzed brow, and his keen eye scanning the crowd as if
he knew their every thought. His frock hung loosely, exposing his round
throat, mossy chest, and short and nervous arm embossed with pugilistic
bruises, and quaint with many a device in India ink.

In the midst of a portentous silence, the consul unrolled his papers,
evidently intending to produce an effect by the exceeding bigness of
his looks.

“Mr. Jermin, call off their names;” and he handed him a list of the
ship’s company.

All answered but the deserters and the two mariners at the bottom of
the sea.

It was now supposed that the Round Robin would be produced, and
something said about it. But not so. Among the consul’s papers that
unique document was thought to be perceived; but, if there, it was too
much despised to be made a subject of comment. Some present, very
justly regarding it as an uncommon literary production, had been
anticipating all sorts of miracles therefrom; and were, therefore, much
touched at this neglect.

“Well, men,” began Wilson again after a short pause, “although you all
look hearty enough, I’m told there are some sick among you. Now then,
Mr. Jermin, call off the names on that sick-list of yours, and let them
go over to the other side of the deck—I should like to see who they
are.”

“So, then,” said he, after we had all passed over, “you are the sick
fellows, are you? Very good: I shall have you seen to. You will go down
into the cabin one by one, to Doctor Johnson, who will report your
respective cases to me. Such as he pronounces in a dying state I shall
have sent ashore; the rest will be provided with everything needful,
and remain aboard.”

At this announcement, we gazed strangely at each other, anxious to see
who it was that looked like dying, and pretty nearly deciding to stay
aboard and get well, rather than go ashore and be buried. There were
some, nevertheless, who saw very plainly what Wilson was at, and they
acted accordingly. For my own part, I resolved to assume as dying an
expression as possible; hoping that, on the strength of it, I might be
sent ashore, and so get rid of the ship without any further trouble.

With this intention, I determined to take no part in anything that
might happen until my case was decided upon. As for the doctor, he had
all along pretended to be more or less unwell; and by a significant
look now given me, it was plain that he was becoming decidedly worse.

The invalids disposed of for the present, and one of them having gone
below to be examined, the consul turned round to the rest, and
addressed them as follows:—

“Men, I’m going to ask you two or three questions—let one of you answer
yes or no, and the rest keep silent. Now then: Have you anything to say
against your mate, Mr. Jermin?” And he looked sharply among the
sailors, and, at last, right into the eye of the cooper, whom everybody
was eyeing.

“Well, sir,” faltered Bungs, “we can’t say anything against Mr.
Jermin’s seamanship, but—”

“I want no buts,” cried the consul, breaking in: “answer me yes or
no—have you anything to say against Mr. Jermin?”

“I was going on to say, sir; Mr. Jermin’s a very good man; but then—”
Here the mate looked marlinespikes at Bungs; and Bungs, after
stammering out something, looked straight down to a seam in the deck,
and stopped short.

A rather assuming fellow heretofore, the cooper had sported many
feathers in his cap; he was now showing the white one.

“So much then for that part of the business,” exclaimed Wilson,
smartly; “you have nothing to say against him, I see.”

Upon this, several seemed to be on the point of saying a good deal; but
disconcerted by the cooper’s conduct, checked themselves, and the
consul proceeded.

“Have you enough to eat, aboard? answer me, you man who spoke before.”

“Well, I don’t know as to that,” said the cooper, looking excessively
uneasy, and trying to edge back, but pushed forward again. “Some of
that salt horse ain’t as sweet as it might be.”

“That’s not what I asked you,” shouted the consul, growing brave quite
fast; “answer my questions as I put them, or I’ll find a way to make
you.”

This was going a little too far. The ferment, into which the cooper’s
poltroonery had thrown the sailors, now brooked no restraint; and one
of them—a young American who went by the name of Salem—dashed out from
among the rest, and fetching the cooper a blow that sent him humming
over toward the consul, flourished a naked sheath-knife in the air, and
burst forth with “I’m the little fellow that can answer your questions;
just put them to me once, counsellor.” But the “counsellor” had no more
questions to ask just then; for at the alarming apparition of Salem’s
knife, and the extraordinary effect produced upon Bungs, he had popped
his head down the companion-way, and was holding it there.

Upon the mate’s assuring him, however, that it was all over, he looked
up, quite flustered, if not frightened, but evidently determined to put
as fierce a face on the matter as practicable. Speaking sharply, he
warned all present to “look out”; and then repeated the question,
whether there was enough to eat aboard. Everyone now turned spokesman;
and he was assailed by a perfect hurricane of yells, in which the oaths
fell like hailstones.

“How’s this! what d’ye mean?” he cried, upon the first lull; “who told
you all to speak at once? Here, you man with the knife, you’ll be
putting someone’s eyes out yet; d’ye hear, you sir? You seem to have a
good deal to say, who are you, pray; where did you ship?”

“I’m nothing more nor a bloody beach-comber,” retorted Salem, stepping
forward piratically and eyeing him; “and if you want to know, I shipped
at the Islands about four months ago.”

“Only four months ago? And here you have more to say than men who have
been aboard the whole voyage;” and the consul made a dash at looking
furious, but failed. “Let me hear no more from you, sir. Where’s that
respectable, gray-headed man, the cooper? he’s the one to answer my
questions.”

“There’s no ’spectable, gray-headed men aboard,” returned Salem; “we’re
all a parcel of mutineers and pirates!”

All this time, the mate was holding his peace; and Wilson, now
completely abashed, and at a loss what to do, took him by the arm, and
walked across the deck. Returning to the cabin-scuttle, after a close
conversation, he abruptly addressed the sailors, without taking any
further notice of what had just happened.

“For reasons you all know, men, this ship has been placed in my hands.
As Captain Guy will remain ashore for the present, your mate, Mr.
Jermin, will command until his recovery. According to my judgment,
there is no reason why the voyage should not be at once resumed;
especially, as I shall see that you have two more harpooners, and
enough good men to man three boats. As for the sick, neither you nor I
have anything to do with them; they will be attended to by Doctor
Johnson; but I’ve explained that matter before. As soon as things can
be arranged—in a day or two, at farthest—you will go to sea for a three
months’ cruise, touching here, at the end of it, for your captain. Let
me hear a good report of you, now, when you come back. At present, you
will continue lying off and on the harbour. I will send you fresh
provisions as soon as I can get them. There: I’ve nothing more to say;
go forward to your stations.”

And, without another word, he wheeled round to descend into the cabin.
But hardly had he concluded before the incensed men were dancing about
him on every side, and calling upon him to lend an ear. Each one for
himself denied the legality of what he proposed to do; insisted upon
the necessity for taking the ship in; and finally gave him to
understand, roughly and roundly, that go to sea in her they would not.

In the midst of this mutinous uproar, the alarmed consul stood fast by
the scuttle. His tactics had been decided upon beforehand; indeed, they
must have been concerted ashore, between him and the captain; for all
he said, as he now hurried below, was, “Go forward, men; I’m through
with you: you should have mentioned these matters before: my
arrangements are concluded: go forward, I say; I’ve nothing more to say
to you.” And, drawing over the slide of the scuttle, he disappeared.
Upon the very point of following him down, the attention of the
exasperated seamen was called off to a party who had just then taken
the recreant Bungs in hand. Amid a shower of kicks and cuffs, the
traitor was borne along to the forecastle, where—I forbear to relate
what followed.




CHAPTER XXII.
THE CONSUL’S DEPARTURE


During the scenes just described, Doctor Johnson was engaged in
examining the sick, of whom, as it turned out, all but two were to
remain in the ship. He had evidently received his cue from Wilson.

One of the last called below into the cabin, just as the quarter-deck
gathering dispersed, I came on deck quite incensed. My lameness, which,
to tell the truth, was now much better, was put down as, in a great
measure, affected; and my name was on the list of those who would be
fit for any duty in a day or two. This was enough. As for Doctor Long
Ghost, the shore physician, instead of extending to him any
professional sympathy, had treated him very cavalierly. To a certain
extent, therefore, we were now both bent on making common cause with
the sailors.

I must explain myself here. All we wanted was to have the ship snugly
anchored in Papeetee Bay; entertaining no doubt that, could this be
done, it would in some way or other peaceably lead to our emancipation.
Without a downright mutiny, there was but one way to accomplish this:
to induce the men to refuse all further duty, unless it were to work
the vessel in. The only difficulty lay in restraining them within
proper bounds. Nor was it without certain misgivings, that I found
myself so situated, that I must necessarily link myself, however
guardedly, with such a desperate company; and in an enterprise, too, of
which it was hard to conjecture what might be the result. But anything
like neutrality was out of the question; and unconditional submission
was equally so.

On going forward, we found them ten times more tumultuous than ever.
After again restoring some degree of tranquillity, we once more urged
our plan of quietly refusing duty, and awaiting the result. At first,
few would hear of it; but in the end, a good number were convinced by
our representations. Others held out. Nor were those who thought with
us in all things to be controlled.

Upon Wilson’s coming on deck to enter his boat, he was beset on all
sides; and, for a moment, I thought the ship would be seized before his
very eyes.

“Nothing more to say to you, men: my arrangements are made. Go forward,
where you belong. I’ll take no insolence;” and, in a tremor, Wilson
hurried over the side in the midst of a volley of execrations.

Shortly after his departure, the mate ordered the cook and steward into
his boat; and saying that he was going to see how the captain did, left
us, as before, under the charge of Bembo.

At this time we were lying becalmed, pretty close in with the land
(having gone about again), our main-topsail flapping against the mast
with every roll.

The departure of the consul and Jermin was followed by a scene
absolutely indescribable. The sailors ran about deck like madmen;
Bembo, all the while leaning against the taff-rail by himself, smoking
his heathenish stone pipe, and never interfering.

The cooper, who that morning had got himself into a fluid of an
exceedingly high temperature, now did his best to regain the favour of
the crew. “Without distinction of party,” he called upon all hands to
step up, and partake of the contents of his bucket.

But it was quite plain that, before offering to intoxicate others, he
had taken the wise precaution of getting well tipsy himself. He was now
once more happy in the affection of his shipmates, who, one and all,
pronounced him sound to the kelson.

The Pisco soon told; and, with great difficulty, we restrained a party
in the very act of breaking into the after-hold in pursuit of more. All
manner of pranks were now played.

“Mast-head, there! what d’ye see?” bawled Beauty, hailing the
main-truck through an enormous copper funnel. “Stand by for stays,”
roared Flash Jack, bawling off with the cook’s axe, at the fastening of
the main-stay. “Looky out for ’quails!” shrieked the Portuguese,
Antone, darting a handspike through the cabin skylight. And “Heave
round cheerly, men,” sung out Navy Bob, dancing a hornpipe on the
forecastle.




CHAPTER XXIII.
THE SECOND NIGHT OFF PAPEETEE


Toward sunset, the mate came off, singing merrily, in the stern of his
boat; and in attempting to climb up the side, succeeded in going plump
into the water. He was rescued by the steward, and carried across the
deck with many moving expressions of love for his bearer. Tumbled into
the quarter-boat, he soon fell asleep, and waking about midnight,
somewhat sobered, went forward among the men. Here, to prepare for what
follows, we must leave him for a moment.

It was now plain enough that Jermin was by no means unwilling to take
the Julia to sea; indeed, there was nothing he so much desired; though
what his reasons were, seeing our situation, we could only conjecture.
Nevertheless, so it was; and having counted much upon his rough
popularity with the men to reconcile them to a short cruise under him,
he had consequently been disappointed in their behaviour. Still,
thinking that they would take a different view of the matter, when they
came to know what fine times he had in store for them, he resolved upon
trying a little persuasion.

So on going forward, he put his head down the forecastle scuttle, and
hailed us quite cordially, inviting us down into the cabin; where, he
said, he had something to make merry withal. Nothing loth, we went; and
throwing ourselves along the transom, waited for the steward to serve
us.

As the can circulated, Jermin, leaning on the table and occupying the
captain’s arm-chair secured to the deck, opened his mind as bluntly and
freely as ever. He was by no means yet sober.

He told us we were acting very foolishly; that if we only stuck to the
ship, he would lead us all a jovial life of it; enumerating the casks
still remaining untapped in the Julia’s wooden cellar. It was even
hinted vaguely that such a thing might happen as our not coming back
for the captain; whom he spoke of but lightly; asserting, what he had
often said before, that he was no sailor.

Moreover, and perhaps with special reference to Doctor Long Ghost and
myself, he assured us generally that, if there were any among us
studiously inclined, he would take great pleasure in teaching such the
whole art and mystery of navigation, including the gratuitous use of
his quadrant.

I should have mentioned that, previous to this, he had taken the doctor
aside, and said something about reinstating him in the cabin with
augmented dignity; beside throwing out a hint that I myself was in some
way or other to be promoted. But it was all to no purpose; bent the men
were upon going ashore, and there was no moving them.

At last he flew into a rage—much increased by the frequency of his
potations—and with many imprecations, concluded by driving everybody
out of the cabin. We tumbled up the gangway in high good-humour.

Upon deck everything looked so quiet that some of the most pugnacious
spirits actually lamented that there was so little prospect of an
exhilarating disturbance before morning. It was not five minutes,
however, ere these fellows were gratified.

Sydney Ben—said to be a runaway Ticket-of-Leave-Man, and for reasons of
his own, one of the few who still remained on duty—had, for the sake of
the fun, gone down with the rest into the cabin; where Bembo, who
meanwhile was left in charge of the deck, had frequently called out for
him. At first, Ben pretended not to hear; but on being sung out for
again and again, bluntly refused; at the same time, casting some
illiberal reflections on the Mowree’s maternal origin, which the latter
had been long enough among the sailors to understand as in the highest
degree offensive. So just after the men came up from below, Bembo
singled him out, and gave him such a cursing in his broken lingo that
it was enough to frighten one. The convict was the worse for liquor;
indeed the Mowree had been tippling also, and before we knew it, a blow
was struck by Ben, and the two men came together like magnets.

The Ticket-of-Leave-Man was a practised bruiser; but the savage knew
nothing of the art pugilistic: and so they were even. It was clear
hugging and wrenching till both came to the deck. Here they rolled over
and over in the middle of a ring which seemed to form of itself. At
last the white man’s head fell back, and his face grew purple. Bembo’s
teeth were at his throat. Rushing in all round, they hauled the savage
off, but not until repeatedly struck on the head would he let go.

His rage was now absolutely demoniac; he lay glaring and writhing on
the deck, without attempting to rise. Cowed, as they supposed he was,
from his attitude, the men, rejoiced at seeing him thus humbled, left
him; after rating him, in sailor style, for a cannibal and a coward.

Ben was attended to, and led below.

Soon after this, the rest also, with but few exceptions, retired into
the forecastle; and having been up nearly all the previous night, they
quickly dropped about the chests and rolled into the hammocks. In an
hour’s time, not a sound could be heard in that part of the ship.

Before Bembo was dragged away, the mate had in vain endeavoured to
separate the combatants, repeatedly striking the Mowree; but the seamen
interposing, at last kept him off.

And intoxicated as he was, when they dispersed, he knew enough to
charge the steward—a steady seaman be it remembered—with the present
safety of the ship; and then went below, when he fell directly into
another drunken sleep.

Having remained upon deck with the doctor some time after the rest had
gone below, I was just on the point of following him down, when I saw
the Mowree rise, draw a bucket of water, and holding it high above his
head, pour its contents right over him. This he repeated several times.
There was nothing very peculiar in the act, but something else about
him struck me. However, I thought no more of it, but descended the
scuttle.

After a restless nap, I found the atmosphere of the forecastle so
close, from nearly all the men being down at the same time, that I
hunted up an old pea-jacket and went on deck; intending to sleep it out
there till morning. Here I found the cook and steward, Wymontoo, Rope
Yarn, and the Dane; who, being all quiet, manageable fellows, and
holding aloof from the rest since the captain’s departure, had been
ordered by the mate not to go below until sunrise. They were lying
under the lee of the bulwarks; two or three fast asleep, and the others
smoking their pipes, and conversing.

To my surprise, Bembo was at the helm; but there being so few to stand
there now, they told me, he had offered to take his turn with the rest,
at the same time heading the watch; and to this, of course, they made
no objection.

It was a fine, bright night; all moon and stars, and white crests of
waves. The breeze was light, but freshening; and close-hauled, poor
little Jule, as if nothing had happened, was heading in for the land,
which rose high and hazy in the distance.

After the day’s uproar, the tranquillity of the scene was soothing, and
I leaned over the side to enjoy it.

More than ever did I now lament my situation—but it was useless to
repine, and I could not upbraid myself. So at last, becoming drowsy, I
made a bed with my jacket under the windlass, and tried to forget
myself.

How long I lay there, I cannot tell; but as I rose, the first object
that met my eye was Bembo at the helm; his dark figure slowly rising
and falling with the ship’s motion against the spangled heavens behind.
He seemed all impatience and expectation; standing at arm’s length from
the spokes, with one foot advanced, and his bare head thrust forward.
Where I was, the watch were out of sight; and no one else was stirring;
the deserted decks and broad white sails were gleaming in the
moonlight.

Presently, a swelling, dashing sound came upon my ear, and I had a sort
of vague consciousness that I had been hearing it before. The next
instant I was broad awake and on my feet. Eight ahead, and so near that
my heart stood still, was a long line of breakers, heaving and
frothing. It was the coral reef girdling the island. Behind it, and
almost casting their shadows upon the deck, were the sleeping
mountains, about whose hazy peaks the gray dawn was just breaking. The
breeze had freshened, and with a steady, gliding motion, we were
running straight for the reef.

All was taken in at a glance; the fell purpose of Bembo was obvious,
and with a frenzied shout to wake the watch, I rushed aft. They sprang
to their feet bewildered; and after a short, but desperate scuffle, we
tore him from the helm. In wrestling with him, the wheel—left for a
moment unguarded—flew to leeward, thus, fortunately, bringing the
ship’s head to the wind, and so retarding her progress. Previous to
this, she had been kept three or four points free, so as to close with
the breakers. Her headway now shortened, I steadied the helm, keeping
the sails just lifting, while we glided obliquely toward the land. To
have run off before the wind—an easy thing—would have been almost
instant destruction, owing to a curve of the reef in that direction. At
this time, the Dane and the steward were still struggling with the
furious Mowree, and the others were running about irresolute and
shouting.

But darting forward the instant I had the helm, the old cook thundered
on the forecastle with a handspike, “Breakers! breakers close
aboard!—’bout ship! ’bout ship!”

Up came the sailors, staring about them in stupid horror.

“Haul back the head-yards!” “Let go the lee fore-brace!” “Ready about!
about!” were now shouted on all sides; while distracted by a thousand
orders, they ran hither and thither, fairly panic-stricken.

It seemed all over with us; and I was just upon the point of throwing
the ship full into the wind (a step, which, saving us for the instant,
would have sealed our fate in the end), when a sharp cry shot by my ear
like the flight of an arrow.

It was Salem: “All ready for’ard; hard down!”

Round and round went the spokes—the Julia, with her short keel,
spinning to windward like a top. Soon, the jib-sheets lashed the stays,
and the men, more self-possessed, flew to the braces.

“Main-sail haul!” was now heard, as the fresh breeze streamed fore and
aft the deck; and directly the after-yards were whirled round.

In a half-a-minute more, we were sailing away from the land on the
other tack, with every sail distended.

Turning on her heel within little more than a biscuit’s toss of the
reef, no earthly power could have saved us, were it not that, up to the
very brink of the coral rampart, there are no soundings.




CHAPTER XXIV.
OUTBREAK OF THE CREW


The purpose of Bembo had been made known to the men generally by the
watch; and now that our salvation was certain, by an instinctive
impulse they raised a cry, and rushed toward him.

Just before liberated by Dunk and the steward, he was standing doggedly
by the mizzen-mast; and, as the infuriated sailors came on, his
bloodshot eye rolled, and his sheath-knife glittered over his head.

“Down with him!” “Strike him down!” “Hang him at the main-yard!” such
were the shouts now raised. But he stood unmoved, and, for a single
instant, they absolutely faltered.

“Cowards!” cried Salem, and he flung himself upon him. The steel
descended like a ray of light; but did no harm; for the sailor’s heart
was beating against the Mowree’s before he was aware.

They both fell to the deck, when the knife was instantly seized, and
Bembo secured.

“For’ard! for’ard with him!” was again the cry; “give him a sea-toss!”
“Overboard with him!” and he was dragged along the deck, struggling and
fighting with tooth and nail.

All this uproar immediately over the mate’s head at last roused him
from his drunken nap, and he came staggering on deck.

“What’s this?” he shouted, running right in among them.

“It’s the Mowree, zur; they are going to murder him, zur,” here sobbed
poor Rope Yarn, crawling close up to him.

“Avast! avast!” roared Jermin, making a spring toward Bembo, and
dashing two or three of the sailors aside. At this moment the wretch
was partly flung over the bulwarks, which shook with his frantic
struggles. In vain the doctor and others tried to save him: the men
listened to nothing.

“Murder and mutiny, by the salt sea!” shouted the mate; and dashing his
arms right and left, he planted his iron hand upon the Mowree’s
shoulder.

“There are two of us now; and as you serve him, you serve me,” he
cried, turning fiercely round.

“Over with them together, then,” exclaimed the carpenter, springing
forward; but the rest fell back before the courageous front of Jermin,
and, with the speed of thought, Bembo, unharmed, stood upon deck.

“Aft with ye!” cried his deliverer; and he pushed him right among the
men, taking care to follow him up close. Giving the sailors no time to
recover, he pushed the Mowree before him, till they came to the cabin
scuttle, when he drew the slide over him, and stood still. Throughout,
Bembo never spoke one word.

“Now for’ard where ye belong!” cried the mate, addressing the seamen,
who by this time, rallying again, had no idea of losing their victim.

“The Mowree! the Mowree!” they shouted.

Here the doctor, in answer to the mate’s repeated questions, stepped
forward, and related what Bembo had been doing; a matter which the mate
but dimly understood from the violent threatenings he had been hearing.

For a moment he seemed to waver; but at last, turning the key of the
padlock of the slide, he breathed through his set teeth—“Ye can’t have
him; I’ll hand him over to the consul; so for’ard with ye, I say: when
there’s any drowning to be done, I’ll pass the word; so away with ye,
ye blood-thirsty pirates.”

It was to no purpose that they begged or threatened: Jermin, although
by no means sober, stood his ground manfully, and before long they
dispersed, soon to forget everything that had happened.

Though we had no opportunity to hear him confess it, Bembo’s intention
to destroy us was beyond all question. His only motive could have been
a desire to revenge the contumely heaped upon him the night previous,
operating upon a heart irreclaimably savage, and at no time fraternally
disposed toward the crew.

During the whole of this scene the doctor did his best to save him. But
well knowing that all I could do would have been equally useless, I
maintained my place at the wheel. Indeed, no one but Jermin could have
prevented this murder.




CHAPTER XXV.
JERMIN ENCOUNTERS AN OLD SHIPMATE


During the morning of the day which dawned upon the events just
recounted, we remained a little to leeward of the harbour, waiting the
appearance of the consul, who had promised the mate to come off in a
shore boat for the purpose of seeing him.

By this time the men had forced his secret from the cooper, and the
consequence was that they kept him continually coming and going from
the after-hold. The mate must have known this; but he said nothing,
notwithstanding all the dancing and singing, and occasional fighting
which announced the flow of the Pisco.

The peaceable influence which the doctor and myself had heretofore been
exerting, was now very nearly at an end.

Confident, from the aspect of matters, that the ship, after all, would
be obliged to go in; and learning, moreover, that the mate had said so,
the sailors, for the present, seemed in no hurry about it; especially
as the bucket of Bungs gave such generous cheer.

As for Bembo, we were told that, after putting him in double irons, the
mate had locked him up in the captain’s state-room, taking the
additional precaution of keeping the cabin scuttle secured. From this
time forward we never saw the Mowree again, a circumstance which will
explain itself as the narrative proceeds.

Noon came, and no consul; and as the afternoon advanced without any
word even from the shore, the mate was justly incensed; more especially
as he had taken great pains to keep perfectly sober against Wilson’s
arrival.

Two or three hours before sundown, a small schooner came out of the
harbour, and headed over for the adjoining island of Imeeo, or Moreea,
in plain sight, about fifteen miles distant. The wind failing, the
current swept her down under our bows, where we had a fair glimpse of
the natives on her decks.

There were a score of them, perhaps, lounging upon spread mats, and
smoking their pipes. On floating so near, and hearing the maudlin cries
of our crew, and beholding their antics, they must have taken us for a
pirate; at any rate, they got out their sweeps, and pulled away as fast
as they could; the sight of our two six-pounders, which, by way of a
joke, were now run out of the side-ports, giving a fresh impetus to
their efforts. But they had not gone far, when a white man, with a red
sash about his waist, made his appearance on deck, the natives
immediately desisting.

Hailing us loudly, he said he was coming aboard; and after some
confusion on the schooner’s decks, a small canoe was launched
over-board, and, in a minute or two, he was with us. He turned out to
be an old shipmate of Jermin’s, one Viner, long supposed dead, but now
resident on the island.

The meeting of these men, under the circumstances, is one of a thousand
occurrences appearing exaggerated in fiction; but, nevertheless,
frequently realized in actual lives of adventure.

Some fifteen years previous, they had sailed together as officers of
the barque Jane, of London, a South Seaman. Somewhere near the New
Hebrides, they struck one night upon an unknown reef; and, in a few
hours, the Jane went to pieces. The boats, however, were saved; some
provisions also, a quadrant, and a few other articles. But several of
the men were lost before they got clear of the wreck.

The three boats, commanded respectively by the captain, Jermin, and the
third mate, then set sail for a small English settlement at the Bay of
Islands in New Zealand. Of course they kept together as much as
possible. After being at sea about a week, a Lascar in the captain’s
boat went crazy; and, it being dangerous to keep him, they tried to
throw him overboard. In the confusion that ensued the boat capsized
from the sail’s “jibing”; and a considerable sea running at the time,
and the other boats being separated more than usual, only one man was
picked up. The very next night it blew a heavy gale; and the remaining
boats taking in all sail, made bundles of their oars, flung them
overboard, and rode to them with plenty of line. When morning broke,
Jermin and his men were alone upon the ocean: the third mate’s boat, in
all probability, having gone down.

After great hardships, the survivors caught sight of a brig, which took
them on board, and eventually landed them at Sydney.

Ever since then our mate had sailed from that port, never once hearing
of his lost shipmates, whom, by this time, of course, he had long given
up. Judge, then, his feelings when Viner, the lost third mate, the
instant he touched the deck, rushed up and wrung him by the hand.

During the gale his line had parted; so that the boat, drifting fast to
leeward, was out of sight by morning. Reduced, after this, to great
extremities, the boat touched, for fruit, at an island of which they
knew nothing. The natives, at first, received them kindly; but one of
the men getting into a quarrel on account of a woman, and the rest
taking his part, they were all massacred but Viner, who, at the time,
was in an adjoining village. After staying on the island more than two
years, he finally escaped in the boat of an American whaler, which
landed him at Valparaiso. From this period he had continued to follow
the seas, as a man before the mast, until about eighteen months
previous, when he went ashore at Tahiti, where he now owned the
schooner we saw, in which he traded among the neighbouring islands.

The breeze springing up again just after nightfall, Viner left us,
promising his old shipmate to see him again, three days hence, in
Papeetee harbour.




CHAPTER XXVI.
WE ENTER THE HARBOUR—JIM THE PILOT


Exhausted by the day’s wassail, most of the men went below at an early
hour, leaving the deck to the steward and two of the men remaining on
duty; the mate, with Baltimore and the Dane, engaging to relieve them
at midnight. At that hour, the ship—now standing off shore, under short
sail—was to be tacked.

It was not long after midnight, when we were wakened in the forecastle
by the lion roar of Jermin’s voice, ordering a pull at the
jib-halyards; and soon afterwards, a handspike struck the scuttle, and
all hands were called to take the ship into port.

This was wholly unexpected; but we learned directly that the mate, no
longer relying upon the consul, and renouncing all thought of inducing
the men to change their minds, had suddenly made up his own. He was
going to beat up to the entrance of the harbour, so as to show a signal
for a pilot before sunrise.

Notwithstanding this, the sailors absolutely refused to assist in
working the ship under any circumstances whatever: to all mine and the
doctor’s entreaties lending a deaf ear. Sink or strike, they swore they
would have nothing more to do with her. This perverseness was to be
attributed, in a great measure, to the effects of their late debauch.

With a strong breeze, all sail set, and the ship in the hands of four
or five men, exhausted by two nights’ watching, our situation was bad
enough; especially as the mate seemed more reckless than ever, and we
were now to tack ship several times close under the land.

Well knowing that if anything untoward happened to the vessel before
morning, it would be imputed to the conduct of the crew, and so lead to
serious results, should they ever be brought to trial; I called
together those on deck to witness my declaration;—that now that the
Julia was destined for the harbour (the only object for which I, at
least, had been struggling), I was willing to do what I could toward
carrying her in safely. In this step I was followed by the doctor.

The hours passed anxiously until morning; when, being well to windward
of the mouth of the harbour, we bore up for it, with the union-jack at
the fore. No sign, however, of boat or pilot was seen; and after
running close in several times, the ensign was set at the mizzen-peak,
union down in distress. But it was of no avail.

Attributing to Wilson this unaccountable remissness on the part of
those ashore, Jermin, quite enraged, now determined to stand boldly in
upon his own responsibility; trusting solely to what he remembered of
the harbour on a visit there many years previous.

This resolution was characteristic. Even with a competent pilot,
Papeetee Bay, is considered a ticklish, one to enter. Formed by a bold
sweep of the shore, it is protected seaward by the coral reef, upon
which the rollers break with great violence. After stretching across
the bay, the barrier extends on toward Point Venus, in the district of
Matavia, eight or nine miles distant. Here there is an opening, by
which ships enter, and glide down the smooth, deep canal, between the
reef and the shore, to the harbour. But, by seamen generally, the
leeward entrance is preferred, as the wind is extremely variable inside
the reef. This latter entrance is a break in the barrier directly
facing the bay and village of Papeetee. It is very narrow; and from the
baffling winds, currents, and sunken rocks, ships now and then grate
their keels against the coral.

But the mate was not to be daunted; so, stationing what men he had at
the braces, he sprang upon the bulwarks, and, bidding everybody keep
wide awake, ordered the helm up. In a few moments, we were running in.
Being toward noon, the wind was fast leaving us, and, by the time the
breakers were roaring on either hand, little more than steerage-way was
left. But on we glided—smoothly and deftly; avoiding the green,
darkling objects here and there strewn in our path; Jermin occasionally
looking down in the water, and then about him, with the utmost
calmness, and not a word spoken. Just fanned along thus, it was not
many minutes ere we were past all danger, and floated into the placid
basin within. This was the cleverest specimen of his seamanship that he
ever gave us.

As we held on toward the frigate and shipping, a canoe, coming out from
among them, approached. In it were a boy and an old man—both islanders;
the former nearly naked, and the latter dressed in an old naval
frock-coat. Both were paddling with might and main; the old man, once
in a while, tearing his paddle out of the water; and, after rapping his
companion over the head, both fell to with fresh vigour. As they came
within hail, the old fellow, springing to his feet and flourishing his
paddle, cut some of the queerest capers; all the while jabbering
something which at first we could not understand.

Presently we made out the following:—“Ah! you pemi, ah!—you come!—What
for you come?—You be fine for come no pilot.—I say, you hear?—I say,
you ita maitui (no good).—You hear?—You no pilot.—Yes, you d—— me, you
no pilot ’t all; I d—— you; you hear?”

This tirade, which showed plainly that, whatever the profane old rascal
was at, he was in right good earnest, produced peals of laughter from
the ship. Upon which, he seemed to get beside himself; and the boy,
who, with suspended paddle, was staring about him, received a sound box
over the head, which set him to work in a twinkling, and brought the
canoe quite near. The orator now opening afresh, it turned out that his
vehement rhetoric was all addressed to the mate, still standing
conspicuously on the bulwarks.

But Jermin was in no humour for nonsense; so, with a sailor’s blessing,
he ordered him off. The old fellow then flew into a regular frenzy,
cursing and swearing worse than any civilized being I ever heard.

“You sabbee me?” he shouted. “You know me, ah? Well; me Jim, me
pilot—been pilot now long time.”

“Ay,” cried Jermin, quite surprised, as indeed we all were, “you are
the pilot, then, you old pagan. Why didn’t you come off before this?”

“Ah! me scibbee,—me know—you piratee (pirate)—see you long time, but no
me come—I sabbee you—you ita maitai nuee (superlatively bad).”

“Paddle away with ye,” roared Jermin, in a rage; “be off! or I’ll dart
a harpoon at ye!”

But, instead of obeying the order, Jim, seizing his paddle, darted the
canoe right up to the gangway, and, in two bounds, stood on deck.

Pulling a greasy silk handkerchief still lower over his brow, and
improving the sit of his frock-coat with a vigorous jerk, he then
strode up to the mate; and, in a more flowery style than ever, gave him
to understand that the redoubtable “Jim,” himself, was before him; that
the ship was his until the anchor was down; and he should like to hear
what anyone had to say to it.

As there now seemed little doubt that he was all he claimed to be, the
Julia was at last surrendered.

Our gentleman now proceeded to bring us to an anchor, jumping up
between the knight-heads, and bawling out “Luff! luff! keepy off!
leeepy off!” and insisting upon each time being respectfully responded
to by the man at the helm. At this time our steerage-way was almost
gone; and yet, in giving his orders, the passionate old man made as
much fuss as a white squall aboard the Flying Dutchman.

Jim turned out to be the regular pilot of the harbour; a post, be it
known, of no small profit; and, in his eyes, at least, invested with
immense importance. Our unceremonious entrance, therefore, was regarded
as highly insulting, and tending to depreciate both the dignity and
lucrativeness of his office.

The old man is something of a wizard. Having an understanding with the
elements, certain phenomena of theirs are exhibited for his particular
benefit. Unusually clear weather, with a fine steady breeze, is a
certain sign that a merchantman is at hand; whale-spouts seen from the
harbour are tokens of a whaling vessel’s approach; and thunder and
lightning, happening so seldom as they do, are proof positive that a
man-of-war is drawing near.

In short, Jim, the pilot, is quite a character in his way; and no one
visits Tahiti without hearing some curious story about him.




CHAPTER XXVII.
A GLANCE AT PAPEETEE—WE ARE SENT ABOARD THE FRIGATE


The village of Papeetee struck us all very pleasantly. Lying in a
semicircle round the bay, the tasteful mansions of the chiefs and
foreign residents impart an air of tropical elegance, heightened by the
palm-trees waving here and there, and the deep-green groves of the
Bread-Fruit in the background. The squalid huts of the common people
are out of sight, and there is nothing to mar the prospect.

All round the water extends a wide, smooth beach of mixed pebbles and
fragments of coral. This forms the thoroughfare of the village; the
handsomest houses all facing it—the fluctuation of the tides being so
inconsiderable that they cause no inconvenience.

The Pritchard residence—a fine large building—occupies a site on one
side of the bay: a green lawn slopes off to the sea: and in front waves
the English flag. Across the water, the tricolour also, and the stars
and stripes, distinguish the residences of the other consuls.

What greatly added to the picturesqueness of the bay at this time was
the condemned hull of a large ship, which, at the farther end of the
harbour, lay bilged upon the beach, its stern settled low in the water,
and the other end high and dry. From where we lay, the trees behind
seemed to lock their leafy boughs over its bowsprit; which, from its
position, looked nearly upright.

She was an American whaler, a very old craft. Having sprung a leak at
sea, she had made all sail for the island, to heave down for repairs.
Found utterly unseaworthy, however, her oil was taken out and sent home
in another vessel; the hull was then stripped and sold for a trifle.

Before leaving Tahiti, I had the curiosity to go over this poor old
ship, thus stranded on a strange shore. What were my emotions, when I
saw upon her stern the name of a small town on the river Hudson! She
was from the noble stream on whose banks I was born; in whose waters I
had a hundred times bathed. In an instant, palm-trees and elms—canoes
and skiffs—church spires and bamboos—all mingled in one vision of the
present and the past.

But we must not leave little Jule.

At last the wishes of many were gratified; and like an aeronaut’s
grapnel, her rusty little anchor was caught in the coral groves at the
bottom of Papeetee Bay. This must have been more than forty days after
leaving the Marquesas.

The sails were yet unfurled, when a boat came alongside with our
esteemed friend Wilson, the consul.

“How’s this, how’s this, Mr. Jermin?” he began, looking very savage as
he touched the deck. “What brings you in without orders?”

“You did not come off to us, as you promised, sir; and there was no
hanging on longer with nobody to work the ship,” was the blunt reply.

“So the infernal scoundrels held out—did they? Very good; I’ll make
them sweat for it,” and he eyed the scowling men with unwonted
intrepidity. The truth was, he felt safer now, than when outside the
reef.

“Muster the mutineers on the quarter-deck,” he continued. “Drive them
aft, sir, sick and well: I have a word to say to them.”

“Now, men,” said he, “you think it’s all well with you, I suppose. You
wished the ship in, and here she is. Captain Guy’s ashore, and you
think you must go too: but we’ll see about that—I’ll miserably
disappoint you.” (These last were his very words.) “Mr. Jermin, call
off the names of those who did not refuse duty, and let them go over to
the starboard side.”

This done, a list was made out of the “mutineers,” as he was pleased to
call the rest. Among these, the doctor and myself were included; though
the former stepped forward, and boldly pleaded the office held by him
when the vessel left Sydney. The mate also—who had always been
friendly—stated the service rendered by myself two nights previous, as
well as my conduct when he announced his intention to enter the
harbour. For myself, I stoutly maintained that, according to the tenor
of the agreement made with Captain Guy, my time aboard the ship had
expired—the cruise being virtually at an end, however it had been
brought about—and I claimed my discharge.

But Wilson would hear nothing. Marking something in my manner,
nevertheless, he asked my name and country; and then observed with a
sneer, “Ah, you are the lad, I see, that wrote the Round Robin; I’ll
take good care of you, my fine fellow—step back, sir.”

As for poor Long Ghost, he denounced him as a “Sydney Flash-Gorger”;
though what under heaven he meant by that euphonious title is more than
I can tell. Upon this, the doctor gave him such a piece of his mind
that the consul furiously commanded him to hold his peace, or he would
instantly have him seized into the rigging and flogged. There was no
help for either of us—we were judged by the company we kept.

All were now sent forward; not a word being said as to what he intended
doing with us.

After a talk with the mate, the consul withdrew, going aboard the
French frigate, which lay within a cable’s length. We now suspected his
object; and since matters had come to this pass, were rejoiced at it.
In a day or two the Frenchman was to sail for Valparaiso, the usual
place of rendezvous for the English squadron in the Pacific; and
doubtless, Wilson meant to put us on board, and send us thither to be
delivered up. Should our conjecture prove correct, all we had to
expect, according to our most experienced shipmates, was the fag end of
a cruise in one of her majesty’s ships, and a discharge before long at
Portsmouth.

We now proceeded to put on all the clothes we could—frock over frock,
and trousers over trousers—so as to be in readiness for removal at a
moment’s warning. Armed ships allow nothing superfluous to litter up
the deck; and therefore, should we go aboard the frigate, our chests
and their contents would have to be left behind.

In an hour’s time, the first cutter of the Reine Blanche came
alongside, manned by eighteen or twenty sailors, armed with cutlasses
and boarding pistols—the officers, of course, wearing their side-arms,
and the consul in an official cocked hat borrowed for the occasion. The
boat was painted a “pirate black,” its crew were a dark, grim-looking
set, and the officers uncommonly fierce-looking little Frenchmen. On
the whole they were calculated to intimidate—the consul’s object,
doubtless, in bringing them.

Summoned aft again, everyone’s name was called separately; and being
solemnly reminded that it was his last chance to escape punishment, was
asked if he still refused duty. The response was instantaneous: “Ay,
sir, I do.” In some cases followed up by divers explanatory
observations, cut short by Wilson’s ordering the delinquent to the
cutter. As a general thing, the order was promptly obeyed—some taking a
sequence of hops, skips, and jumps, by way of showing not only their
unimpaired activity of body, but their alacrity in complying with all
reasonable requests.

Having avowed their resolution not to pull another rope of the
Julia’s—even if at once restored to perfect health—all the invalids,
with the exception of the two to be set ashore, accompanied us into the
cutter: They were in high spirits; so much so that something was
insinuated about their not having been quite as ill as pretended.

The cooper’s name was the last called; we did not hear what he
answered, but he stayed behind. Nothing was done about the Mowree.

Shoving clear from the ship, three loud cheers were raised; Flash Jack
and others receiving a sharp reprimand for it from the consul.

“Good-bye, Little Jule,” cried Navy Bob, as we swept under the bows.
“Don’t fall overboard, Ropey,” said another to the poor landlubber,
who, with Wymontoo, the Dane, and others left behind, was looking over
at us from the forecastle.

“Give her three more!” cried Salem, springing to his feet and whirling
his hat round. “You sacre dam raakeel,” shouted the lieutenant of the
party, bringing the flat of his sabre across his shoulders, “you now
keepy steel.”

The doctor and myself, more discreet, sat quietly in the bow of the
cutter; and for my own part, though I did not repent what I had done,
my reflections were far from being enviable.




CHAPTER XXVIII.
RECEPTION FROM THE FRENCHMAN


In a few moments, we were paraded in the frigate’s gangway; the first
lieutenant—an elderly yellow-faced officer, in an ill-cut coat and
tarnished gold lace—coming up, and frowning upon us.

This gentleman’s head was a mere bald spot; his legs, sticks; in short,
his whole physical vigour seemed exhausted in the production of one
enormous moustache. Old Gamboge, as he was forthwith christened, now
received a paper from the consul; and, opening it, proceeded to compare
the goods delivered with the invoice.

After being thoroughly counted, a meek little midshipman was called,
and we were soon after given in custody to half-a-dozen
sailor-soldiers—fellows with tarpaulins and muskets. Preceded by a
pompous functionary (whom we took for one of the ship’s corporals, from
his ratan and the gold lace on his sleeve), we were now escorted down
the ladders to the berth-deck.

Here we were politely handcuffed, all round; the man with the bamboo
evincing the utmost solicitude in giving us a good fit from a large
basket of the articles of assorted sizes.

Taken by surprise at such an uncivil reception, a few of the party
demurred; but all coyness was, at last, overcome; and finally our feet
were inserted into heavy anklets of iron, running along a great bar
bolted down to the deck. After this, we considered ourselves
permanently established in our new quarters.

“The deuce take their old iron!” exclaimed the doctor; “if I’d known
this, I’d stayed behind.”

“Ha, ha!” cried Flash Jack, “you’re in for it, Doctor Long Ghost.”

“My hands and feet are, any way,” was the reply.

They placed a sentry over us; a great lubber of a fellow, who marched
up and down with a dilapidated old cutlass of most extraordinary
dimensions. From its length, we had some idea that it was expressly
intended to keep a crowd in order—reaching over the heads of
half-a-dozen, say, so as to get a cut at somebody behind.

“Mercy!” ejaculated the doctor with a shudder, “what a sensation it
must be to be killed by such a tool.”

We fasted till night, when one of the boys came along with a couple of
“kids” containing a thin, saffron-coloured fluid, with oily particles
floating on top. The young wag told us this was soup: it turned out to
be nothing more than oleaginous warm water. Such as it was,
nevertheless, we were fain to make a meal of it, our sentry being
attentive enough to undo our bracelets. The “kids” passed from mouth to
mouth, and were soon emptied.

The next morning, when the sentry’s back was turned, someone, whom we
took for an English sailor, tossed over a few oranges, the rinds of
which we afterward used for cups.

On the second day nothing happened worthy of record. On the third, we
were amused by the following scene.

A man, whom we supposed a boatswain’s mate, from the silver whistle
hanging from his neck, came below, driving before him a couple of
blubbering boys, and followed by a whole troop of youngsters in tears.
The pair, it seemed, were sent down to be punished by command of an
officer; the rest had accompanied them out of sympathy.

The boatswain’s mate went to work without delay, seizing the poor
little culprits by their loose frocks, and using a ratan without mercy.
The other boys wept, clasped their hands, and fell on their knees; but
in vain; the boatswain’s mate only hit out at them; once in a while
making them yell ten times louder than ever.

In the midst of the tumult, down comes a midshipman, who, with a great
air, orders the man on deck, and running in among the boys, sets them
to scampering in all directions.

The whole of this proceeding was regarded with infinite scorn by Navy
Bob, who, years before, had been captain of the foretop on board a
line-of-battle ship. In his estimation, it was a lubberly piece of
business throughout: they did things differently in the English navy.




CHAPTER XXIX.
THE REINE BLANCHE


I cannot forbear a brief reflection upon the scene ending the last
chapter.

The ratanning of the young culprits, although significant of the
imperfect discipline of a French man-of-war, may also be considered as
in some measure characteristic of the nation.

In an American or English ship, a boy when flogged is either lashed to
the breech of a gun, or brought right up to the gratings, the same way
the men are. But as a general rule, he is never punished beyond his
strength. You seldom or never draw a cry from the young rogue. He bites
his tongue and stands up to it like a hero. If practicable (which is
not always the case), he makes a point of smiling under the operation.
And so far from his companions taking any compassion on him, they
always make merry over his misfortunes. Should he turn baby and cry,
they are pretty sure to give him afterward a sly pounding in some dark
corner.

This tough training produces its legitimate results. The boy becomes,
in time, a thoroughbred tar, equally ready to strip and take a dozen on
board his own ship, or, cutlass in hand, dash pell-mell on board the
enemy’s. Whereas the young Frenchman, as all the world knows, makes but
an indifferent seaman; and though, for the most part, he fights well
enough, somehow or other he seldom fights well enough to beat.

How few sea-battles have the French ever won! But more: how few ships
have they ever carried by the board—that true criterion of naval
courage! But not a word against French bravery—there is plenty of it;
but not of the right sort. A Yankee’s, or an Englishman’s, is the
downright Waterloo “game.” The French fight better on land; and not
being essentially a maritime people, they ought to stay there. The best
of shipwrights, they are no sailors.

And this carries me back to the Reine Blanche, as noble a specimen of
what wood and iron can make as ever floated.

She was a new ship: the present her maiden cruise. The greatest pains
having been taken in her construction, she was accounted the “crack”
craft in the French navy. She is one of the heavy sixty-gun frigates
now in vogue all over the world, and which we Yankees were the first to
introduce. In action these are the most murderous vessels ever
launched.

The model of the Reine Blanche has all that warlike comeliness only to
be seen in a fine fighting ship. Still, there is a good deal of French
flummery about her—brass plates and other gewgaws stuck on all over,
like baubles on a handsome woman.

Among other things, she carries a stern gallery resting on the uplifted
hands of two Caryatides, larger than life. You step out upon this from
the commodore’s cabin. To behold the rich hangings, and mirrors, and
mahogany within, one is almost prepared to see a bevy of ladies trip
forth on the balcony for an airing.

But come to tread the gun-deck, and all thoughts like these are put to
flight. Such batteries of thunderbolt hurlers! with a
sixty-eight-pounder or two thrown in as make-weights. On the spar-deck,
also, are carronades of enormous calibre.

Recently built, this vessel, of course, had the benefit of the latest
improvements. I was quite amazed to see on what high principles of art
some exceedingly simple things were done. But your Gaul is scientific
about everything; what other people accomplish by a few hard knocks, he
delights in achieving by a complex arrangement of the pulley, lever,
and screw.

What demi-semi-quavers in a French air! In exchanging naval courtesies,
I have known a French band play “Yankee Doodle” with such a string of
variations that no one but a “pretty ’cute” Yankee could tell what they
were at.

In the French navy they have no marines; their men, taking turns at
carrying the musket, are sailors one moment, and soldiers the next; a
fellow running aloft in his line frock to-day, to-morrow stands sentry
at the admiral’s cabin door. This is fatal to anything like proper
sailor pride. To make a man a seaman, he should be put to no other
duty. Indeed, a thorough tar is unfit for anything else; and what is
more, this fact is the best evidence of his being a true sailor.

On board the Reine Blanche, they did not have enough to eat; and what
they did have was not of the right sort. Instead of letting the sailors
file their teeth against the rim of a hard sea-biscuit, they baked
their bread daily in pitiful little rolls. Then they had no “grog”; as
a substitute, they drugged the poor fellows with a thin, sour wine—the
juice of a few grapes, perhaps, to a pint of the juice of
water-faucets. Moreover, the sailors asked for meat, and they gave them
soup; a rascally substitute, as they well knew.

Ever since leaving home, they had been on “short allowance.” At the
present time, those belonging to the boats—and thus getting an
occasional opportunity to run ashore—frequently sold their rations of
bread to some less fortunate shipmate for sixfold its real value.

Another thing tending to promote dissatisfaction among the crew was
their having such a devil of a fellow for a captain. He was one of
those horrid naval bores—a great disciplinarian. In port, he kept them
constantly exercising yards and sails, and maneuvering with the boats;
and at sea, they were forever at quarters; running in and out the
enormous guns, as if their arms were made for nothing else. Then there
was the admiral aboard, also; and, no doubt, he too had a paternal eye
over them.

In the ordinary routine of duty, we could not but be struck with the
listless, slovenly behaviour of these men; there was nothing of the
national vivacity in their movements; nothing of the quick precision
perceptible on the deck of a thoroughly-disciplined armed vessel.

All this, however, when we came to know the reason, was no matter of
surprise; three-fourths of them were pressed men. Some old merchant
sailors had been seized the very day they landed from distant voyages;
while the landsmen, of whom there were many, had been driven down from
the country in herds, and so sent to sea.

At the time, I was quite amazed to hear of press-gangs in a day of
comparative peace; but the anomaly is accounted for by the fact that,
of late, the French have been building up a great military marine, to
take the place of that which Nelson gave to the waves of the sea at
Trafalgar. But it is to be hoped that they are not building their ships
for the people across the channel to take. In case of a war, what a
fluttering of French ensigns there would be!

Though I say the French are no sailors, I am far from seeking to
underrate them as a people. They are an ingenious and right gallant
nation. And, as an American, I take pride in asserting it.




CHAPTER XXX.
THEY TAKE US ASHORE—WHAT HAPPENED THERE


Five days and nights, if I remember right, we were aboard the frigate.
On the afternoon of the fifth, we were told that the next morning she
sailed for Valparaiso. Rejoiced at this, we prayed for a speedy
passage. But, as it turned out, the consul had no idea of letting us
off so easily. To our no small surprise, an officer came along toward
night, and ordered us out of irons. Being then mustered in the gangway,
we were escorted into a cutter alongside, and pulled ashore.

Accosted by Wilson as we struck the beach, he delivered us up to a
numerous guard of natives, who at once conducted us to a house near by.
Here we were made to sit down under a shade without; and the consul and
two elderly European residents passed by us, and entered.

After some delay, during which we were much diverted by the hilarious
good-nature of our guard—one of our number was called out for, followed
by an order for him to enter the house alone.

On returning a moment after, he told us we had little to encounter. It
had simply been asked whether he still continued of the same mind; on
replying yes, something was put down upon a piece of paper, and he was
waved outside. All being summoned in rotation, my own turn came at
last.

Within, Wilson and his two friends were seated magisterially at a
table—an inkstand, a pen, and a sheet of paper lending quite a
business-like air to the apartment. These three gentlemen, being
arrayed in coats and pantaloons, looked respectable, at least in a
country where complete suits of garments are so seldom met with. One
present essayed a solemn aspect; but having a short neck and full face,
only made out to look stupid.

It was this individual who condescended to take a paternal interest in
myself. After declaring my resolution with respect to the ship
unalterable, I was proceeding to withdraw, in compliance with a sign
from the consul, when the stranger turned round to him, saying, “Wait a
minute, if you please, Mr. Wilson; let me talk to that youth. Come
here, my young friend: I’m extremely sorry to see you associated with
these bad men; do you know what it will end in?”

“Oh, that’s the lad that wrote the Round Robin,” interposed the consul.
“He and that rascally doctor are at the bottom of the whole affair—go
outside, sir.”

I retired as from the presence of royalty; backing out with many bows.

The evident prejudice of Wilson against both the doctor and myself was
by no means inexplicable. A man of any education before the mast is
always looked upon with dislike by his captain; and, never mind how
peaceable he may be, should any disturbance arise, from his
intellectual superiority, he is deemed to exert an underhand influence
against the officers.

Little as I had seen of Captain Guy, the few glances cast upon me after
being on board a week or so were sufficient to reveal his enmity—a
feeling quickened by my undisguised companionship with Long Ghost, whom
he both feared and cordially hated. Guy’s relations with the consul
readily explains the latter’s hostility.

The examination over, Wilson and his friends advanced to the doorway;
when the former, assuming a severe expression, pronounced our
perverseness infatuation in the extreme. Nor was there any hope left:
our last chance for pardon was gone. Even were we to become contrite
and crave permission to return to duty, it would not now be permitted.

“Oh! get along with your gammon, counsellor,” exclaimed Black Dan,
absolutely indignant that his understanding should be thus insulted.

Quite enraged, Wilson bade him hold his peace; and then, summoning a
fat old native to his side, addressed him in Tahitian, giving
directions for leading us away to a place of safe keeping.

Hereupon, being marshalled in order, with the old man at our head, we
were put in motion, with loud shouts, along a fine pathway, running far
on through wide groves of the cocoa-nut and bread-fruit.

The rest of our escort trotted on beside us in high good-humour;
jabbering broken English, and in a hundred ways giving us to understand
that Wilson was no favourite of theirs, and that we were prime, good
fellows for holding out as we did. They seemed to know our whole
history.

The scenery around was delightful. The tropical day was fast drawing to
a close; and from where we were, the sun looked like a vast red fire
burning in the woodlands—its rays falling aslant through the endless
ranks of trees, and every leaf fringed with flame. Escaped from the
confined decks of the frigate, the air breathed spices to us; streams
were heard flowing; green boughs were rocking; and far inland, all
sunset flushed, rose the still, steep peaks of the island.

As we proceeded, I was more and more struck by the picturesqueness of
the wide, shaded road. In several places, durable bridges of wood were
thrown over large water-courses; others were spanned by a single arch
of stone. In any part of the road, three horsemen might have ridden
abreast.

This beautiful avenue—by far the best thing which civilization has done
for the island—is called by foreigners “the Broom Road,” though for
what reason I do not know. Originally planned for the convenience of
the missionaries journeying from one station to another, it almost
completely encompasses the larger peninsula; skirting for a distance of
at least sixty miles along the low, fertile lands bordering the sea.
But on the side next Taiarboo, or the lesser peninsula, it sweeps
through a narrow, secluded valley, and thus crosses the island in that
direction.

The uninhabited interior, being almost impenetrable from the
densely-wooded glens, frightful precipices, and sharp mountain ridges
absolutely inaccessible, is but little known, even to the natives
themselves; and so, instead of striking directly across from one
village to another, they follow the Broom Road round and round.

It is by no means, however, altogether travelled on foot; horses being
now quite plentiful. They were introduced from Chili; and possessing
all the gaiety, fleetness, and docility of the Spanish breed, are
admirably adapted to the tastes of the higher classes, who as
equestrians have become very expert. The missionaries and chiefs never
think of journeying except in the saddle; and at all hours of the day
you see the latter galloping along at full speed. Like the Sandwich
Islanders, they ride like Pawnee-Loups.

For miles and miles I have travelled the Broom Road, and never wearied
of the continual change of scenery. But wherever it leads you—whether
through level woods, across grassy glens, or over hills waving with
palms—the bright blue sea on one side, and the green mountain pinnacles
on the other, are always in sight.




CHAPTER XXXI.
THE CALABOOZA BERETANEE


About a mile from the village we came to a halt.

It was a beautiful spot. A mountain stream here flowed at the foot of a
verdant slope; on one hand, it murmured along until the waters,
spreading themselves upon a beach of small, sparkling shells, trickled
into the sea; on the other was a long defile, where the eye pursued a
gleaming, sinuous thread, lost in shade and verdure.

The ground next the road was walled in by a low, rude parapet of
stones; and, upon the summit of the slope beyond, was a large, native
house, the thatch dazzling white, and in shape an oval.

“Calabooza! Calabooza Beretanee!” (the English Jail), cried our
conductor, pointing to the building.

For a few months past, having been used by the consul as a house of
confinement for his refractory sailors, it was thus styled to
distinguish it from similar places in and about Papeetee.

Though extremely romantic in appearance, on a near approach it proved
hut ill adapted to domestic comfort. In short, it was a mere shell,
recently built, and still unfinished. It was open all round, and tufts
of grass were growing here and there under the very roof. The only
piece of furniture was the “stocks,” a clumsy machine for keeping
people in one place, which, I believe, is pretty much out of date in
most countries. It is still in use, however, among the Spaniards in
South America; from whom, it seems, the Tahitians have borrowed the
contrivance, as well as the name by which all places of confinement are
known among them.

The stocks were nothing more than two stout timbers, about twenty feet
in length, and precisely alike. One was placed edgeways on the ground,
and the other, resting on top, left, at regular intervals along the
seam, several round holes, the object of which was evident at a glance.

By this time, our guide had informed us that he went by the name of
“Capin Bob” (Captain Bob); and a hearty old Bob he proved. It was just
the name for him. From the first, so pleased were we with the old man
that we cheerfully acquiesced in his authority.

Entering the building, he set us about fetching heaps of dry leaves to
spread behind the stocks for a couch. A trunk of a small cocoa-nut tree
was then placed for a bolster—rather a hard one, but the natives are
used to it. For a pillow, they use a little billet of wood, scooped
out, and standing on four short legs—a sort of head-stool.

These arrangements completed, Captain Bob proceeded to “hanna-par,” or
secure us, for the night. The upper timber of the machine being lifted
at one end, and our ankles placed in the semicircular spaces of the
lower one, the other beam was then, dropped; both being finally secured
together by an old iron hoop at either extremity. This initiation was
performed to the boisterous mirth of the natives, and diverted
ourselves not a little.

Captain Bob now bustled about, like an old woman seeing the children to
bed. A basket of baked “taro,” or Indian turnip, was brought in, and we
were given a piece all round. Then a great counterpane of coarse, brown
“tappa,” was stretched over the whole party; and, after sundry
injunctions to “moee-moee,” and be “maitai”—in other words, to go to
sleep, and be good boys—we were left to ourselves, fairly put to bed
and tucked in.

Much talk was now had concerning our prospects in life; but the doctor
and I, who lay side by side, thinking the occasion better adapted to
meditation, kept pretty silent; and, before long, the rest ceased
conversing, and, wearied with loss of rest on board the frigate, were
soon sound asleep.

After sliding from one reverie into another, I started, and gave the
doctor a pinch. He was dreaming, however; and, resolved to follow his
example, I troubled him no more.

How the rest managed, I know not; but for my own part, I found it very
hard to get to sleep. The consciousness of having one’s foot pinned;
and the impossibility of getting it anywhere else than just where it
was, was most distressing.

But this was not all: there was no way of lying but straight on your
back; unless, to be sure, one’s limb went round and round in the ankle,
like a swivel. Upon getting into a sort of doze, it was no wonder this
uneasy posture gave me the nightmare. Under the delusion that I was
about some gymnastics or other, I gave my unfortunate member such a
twitch that I started up with the idea that someone was dragging the
stocks away.

Captain Bob and his friends lived in a little hamlet hard by; and when
morning showed in the East, the old gentleman came forth from that
direction likewise, emerging from a grove, and saluting us loudly as he
approached.

Finding everybody awake, he set us at liberty; and, leading us down to
the stream, ordered every man to strip and bathe.

“All han’s, my boy, hanna-hanna, wash!” he cried. Bob was a linguist,
and had been to sea in his day, as he many a time afterwards told us.

At this moment, we were all alone with him; and it would have been the
easiest thing in the world to have given him the slip; but he seemed to
have no idea of such a thing; treating us so frankly and cordially,
indeed, that even had we thought of running, we should have been
ashamed of attempting it. He very well knew, nevertheless (as we
ourselves were not slow in finding out), that, for various reasons, any
attempt of the kind, without some previously arranged plan for leaving
the island, would be certain to fail.

As Bob was a rare one every way, I must give some account of him. There
was a good deal of “personal appearance” about him; in short, he was a
corpulent giant, over six feet in height, and literally as big round as
a hogshead. The enormous bulk of some of the Tahitians has been
frequently spoken of by voyagers.

Beside being the English consul’s jailer, as it were, he carried on a
little Tahitian farming; that is to say, he owned several groves of the
bread-fruit and palm, and never hindered their growing. Close by was a
“taro” patch of his which he occasionally visited.

Bob seldom disposed of the produce of his lands; it was all needed for
domestic consumption. Indeed, for gormandizing, I would have matched
him against any three common-council men at a civic feast.

A friend of Bob’s told me that, owing to his voraciousness, his visits
to other parts of the island were much dreaded; for, according to
Tahitian customs, hospitality without charge is enjoined upon everyone;
and though it is reciprocal in most cases, in Bob’s it was almost out
of the question. The damage done to a native larder in one of his
morning calls was more than could be made good by his entertainer’s
spending the holidays with them.

The old man, as I have hinted, had, once upon a time, been a cruise or
two in a whaling-vessel; and, therefore, he prided himself upon his
English. Having acquired what he knew of it in the forecastle, he
talked little else than sailor phrases, which sounded whimsically
enough.

I asked him one day how old he was. “Olee?” he exclaimed, looking very
profound in consequence of thoroughly understanding so subtile a
question—“Oh! very olee—’tousand ’ear—more—big man when Capin Tootee
(Captain Cook) heavey in sight.” (In sea parlance, came into view.)

This was a thing impossible; but adapting my discourse to the man, I
rejoined—“Ah! you see Capin Tootee—well, how you like him?”

“Oh! he maitai: (good) friend of me, and know my wife.”

On my assuring him strongly that he could not have been born at the
time, he explained himself by saying that he was speaking of his
father, all the while. This, indeed, might very well have been.

It is a curious fact that all these people, young and old, will tell
you that they have enjoyed the honour of a personal acquaintance with
the great navigator; and if you listen to them, they will go on and
tell anecdotes without end. This springs from nothing but their great
desire to please; well knowing that a more agreeable topic for a white
man could not be selected. As for the anachronism of the thing, they
seem to have no idea of it: days and years are all the same to them.

After our sunrise bath, Bob once more placed us in the stocks, almost
moved to tears at subjecting us to so great a hardship; but he could
not treat us otherwise, he said, on pain of the consul’s displeasure.
How long we were to be confined, he did not know; nor what was to be
done with us in the end.

As noon advanced, and no signs of a meal were visible, someone inquired
whether we were to be boarded, as well as lodged, at the Hotel de
Calabooza?

“Vast heavey” (avast heaving, or wait a bit)—said Bob—“kow-kow” (food)
“come ship by by.”

And, sure enough, along comes Rope Tarn with a wooden bucket of the
Julia’s villainous biscuit. With a grin, he said it was a present from
Wilson: it was all we were to get that day. A great cry was now raised;
and well was it for the land-lubber that lie had a pair of legs, and
the men could not use theirs. One and all, we resolved not to touch the
bread, come what come might; and so we told the natives.

Being extravagantly fond of ship-biscuit—the harder the better—they
were quite overjoyed; and offered to give us, every day, a small
quantity of baked bread-fruit and Indian turnip in exchange for the
bread. This we agreed to; and every morning afterward, when the bucket
came, its contents were at once handed over to Bob and his friends, who
never ceased munching until nightfall.

Our exceedingly frugal meal of bread-fruit over, Captain Bob waddled up
to us with a couple of long poles hooked at one end, and several large
baskets of woven cocoa-nut branches.

Not far off was an extensive grove of orange-trees in full bearing; and
myself and another were selected to go with him, and gather a supply
for the party. When we went in among the trees, the sumptuousness of
the orchard was unlike anything I had ever seen; while the fragrance
shaken from the gently waving boughs regaled our senses most
delightfully.

In many places the trees formed a dense shade, spreading overhead a
dark, rustling vault, groined with boughs, and studded here and there
with the ripened spheres, like gilded balls. In several places, the
overladen branches were borne to the earth, hiding the trunk in a tent
of foliage. Once fairly in the grove, we could see nothing else; it was
oranges all round.

To preserve the fruit from bruising, Bob, hooking the twigs with his
pole, let them fall into his basket. But this would not do for us.
Seizing hold of a bough, we brought such a shower to the ground that
our old friend was fain to run from under. Heedless of remonstrance, we
then reclined in the shade, and feasted to our heart’s content. Heaping
up the baskets afterwards, we returned to our comrades, by whom our
arrival was hailed with loud plaudits; and in a marvellously short
time, nothing was left of the oranges we brought but the rinds.

While inmates of the Calabooza, we had as much of the fruit as we
wanted; and to this cause, and others that might be mentioned, may be
ascribed the speedy restoration of our sick to comparative health.

The orange of Tahiti is delicious—small and sweet, with a thin, dry
rind. Though now abounding, it was unknown before Cook’s time, to whom
the natives are indebted for so great a blessing. He likewise
introduced several other kinds of fruit; among these were the fig,
pineapple, and lemon, now seldom met with. The lime still grows, and
some of the poorer natives express the juice to sell to the shipping.
It is highly valued as an anti-scorbutic. Nor was the variety of
foreign fruits and vegetables which were introduced the only benefit
conferred by the first visitors to the Society group. Cattle and sheep
were left at various places. More of them anon.

Thus, after all that of late years has been done for these islanders,
Cook and Vancouver may, in one sense at least, be considered their
greatest benefactors.




CHAPTER XXXII.
PROCEEDINGS OF THE FRENCH AT TAHITI


As I happened to arrive at the island at a very interesting period in
its political affairs, it may be well to give some little account here
of the proceedings of the French, by way of episode to the narrative.
My information was obtained at the time from the general reports then
rife among the natives, as well as from what I learned upon a
subsequent visit, and reliable accounts which I have seen since
reaching home.

It seems that for some time back the French had been making repeated
ineffectual attempts to plant a Roman Catholic mission here. But,
invariably treated with contumely, they sometimes met with open
violence; and, in every case, those directly concerned in the
enterprise were ultimately forced to depart. In one instance, two
priests, Laval and Caset, after enduring a series of persecutions, were
set upon by the natives, maltreated, and finally carried aboard a small
trading schooner, which eventually put them ashore at Wallis’ island—a
savage place—some two thousand miles to the westward.

Now, that the resident English missionaries authorized the banishment
of these priests is a fact undenied by themselves. I was also
repeatedly informed that by their inflammatory harangues they
instigated the riots which preceded the sailing of the schooner. At all
events, it is certain that their unbounded influence with the natives
would easily have enabled them to prevent everything that took place on
this occasion, had they felt so inclined.

Melancholy as such an example of intolerance on the part of Protestant
missionaries must appear, it is not the only one, and by no means the
most flagrant, which might be presented. But I forbear to mention any
others; since they have been more than hinted at by recent voyagers,
and their repetition here would perhaps be attended with no good
effect. Besides, the conduct of the Sandwich Island missionaries in
particular has latterly much amended in this respect.

The treatment of the two priests formed the principal ground (and the
only justifiable one) upon which Du Petit Thouars demanded
satisfaction; and which subsequently led to his seizure of the island.
In addition to other things, he also charged that the flag of
Merenhout, the consul, had been repeatedly insulted, and the property
of a certain French resident violently appropriated by the government.
In the latter instance, the natives were perfectly in the right. At
that time, the law against the traffic in ardent spirits (every now and
then suspended and revived) happened to be in force; and finding a
large quantity on the premises of Victor, a low, knavish adventurer
from Marseilles, the Tahitians pronounced it forfeit.

For these, and similar alleged outrages, a large pecuniary restitution
was demanded (10,000 dollars), which there being no exchequer to
supply, the island was forthwith seized, under cover of a mock treaty,
dictated to the chiefs on the gun-deck of Du Petit Thouars’ frigate.

But, notwithstanding this formality, there seems now little doubt that
the downfall of the Pomarees was decided upon at the Tuilleries.

After establishing the Protectorate, so called, the rear-admiral
sailed; leaving M. Bruat governor, assisted by Reine and Carpegne,
civilians, named members of the Council of Government, and Merenhout,
the consul, now made Commissioner Royal. No soldiers, however, were
landed until several months afterward. As men, Reine and Carpegne were
not disliked by the natives; but Bruat and Merenhout they bitterly
detested. In several interviews with the poor queen, the unfeeling
governor sought to terrify her into compliance with his demands;
clapping his hand upon his sword, shaking his fist in her face, and
swearing violently. “Oh, king of a great nation,” said Pomaree, in her
letter to Louis Philippe, “fetch away this man; I and my people cannot
endure his evil doings. He is a shameless man.”

Although the excitement among the natives did not wholly subside upon
the rear-admiral’s departure, no overt act of violence immediately
followed. The queen had fled to Imeeo; and the dissensions among the
chiefs, together with the ill-advised conduct of the missionaries,
prevented a union upon some common plan of resistance. But the great
body of the people, as well as their queen, confidently relied upon the
speedy interposition of England—a nation bound to them by many ties,
and which, more than once, had solemnly guaranteed their independence.

As for the missionaries, they openly defied the French governor,
childishly predicting fleets and armies from Britain. But what is the
welfare of a spot like Tahiti to the mighty interests of France and
England! There was a remonstrance on one side, and a reply on the
other; and there the matter rested. For once in their brawling lives,
St. George and St. Denis were hand and glove; and they were not going
to cross sabres about Tahiti.

During my stay upon the island, so far as I could see, there was little
to denote that any change had taken place in the government.

Such laws as they had were administered the same as ever; the
missionaries went about unmolested, and comparative tranquillity
everywhere prevailed. Nevertheless, I sometimes heard the natives
inveighing against the French (no favourites, by the bye, throughout
Polynesia), and bitterly regretting that the queen had not, at the
outset, made a stand.

In the house of the chief Adeea, frequent discussions took place
concerning the ability of the island to cope with the French: the
number of fighting men and muskets among the natives were talked of, as
well as the propriety of fortifying several heights overlooking
Papeetee. Imputing these symptoms to the mere resentment of a recent
outrage, and not to any determined spirit of resistance, I little
anticipated the gallant, though useless warfare, so soon to follow my
departure.

At a period subsequent to my first visit, the island, which before was
divided into nineteen districts, with a native chief over each, in
capacity of governor and judge, was, by Bruat, divided into four. Over
these he set as many recreant chiefs, Kitoti, Tati, Utamai, and
Paraita; to whom he paid 1000 dollars each, to secure their assistance
in carrying out his evil designs.

The first blood shed, in any regular conflict, was at Mahanar, upon the
peninsula of Taraiboo. The fight originated in the seizure of a number
of women from the shore by men belonging to one of the French vessels
of war. In this affair, the islanders fought desperately, killing about
fifty of the enemy, and losing ninety of their own number. The French
sailors and marines, who, at the time, were reported to be infuriated
with liquor, gave no quarter; and the survivors only saved themselves
by fleeing to the mountains. Subsequently, the battles of Hararparpi
and Fararar were fought, in which the invaders met with indifferent
success.

Shortly after the engagement at Hararparpi, three Frenchmen were
waylaid in a pass of the valleys, and murdered by the incensed natives.
One was Lefevre, a notorious scoundrel, and a spy, whom Bruat had sent
to conduct a certain Major Fergus (said to be a Pole) to the
hiding-place of four chiefs, whom the governor wished to seize and
execute. This circumstance violently inflamed the hostility of both
parties.

About this time, Kitoti, a depraved chief, and the pliant tool of
Bruat, was induced by him to give a great feast in the Vale of Paree,
to which all his countrymen were invited. The governor’s object was to
gain over all he could to his interests; he supplied an abundance of
wine and brandy, and a scene of bestial intoxication was the natural
consequence. Before it came to this, however, several speeches were
made by the islanders. One of these, delivered by an aged warrior, who
had formerly been at the head of the celebrated Aeorai Society, was
characteristic. “This is a very good feast,” said the reeling old man,
“and the wine also is very good; but you evil-minded Wee-Wees (French),
and you false-hearted men of Tahiti, are all very bad.”

By the latest accounts, most of the islanders still refuse to submit to
the French; and what turn events may hereafter take, it is hard to
predict. At any rate, these disorders must accelerate the final
extinction of their race.

Along with the few officers left by Du Petit Thouars were several
French priests, for whose unobstructed exertions in the dissemination
of their faith, the strongest guarantees were provided by an article of
the treaty. But no one was bound to offer them facilities; much less a
luncheon, the first day they went ashore. True, they had plenty of
gold; but to the natives it was anathema—taboo—and, for several hours
and some odd minutes, they would not touch it. Emissaries of the Pope
and the devil, as the strangers were considered—the smell of sulphur
hardly yet shaken out of their canonicals—what islander would venture
to jeopardize his soul, and call down a blight on his breadfruit, by
holding any intercourse with them! That morning the priests actually
picknicked in grove of cocoa-nut trees; but, before night, Christian
hospitality—in exchange for a commercial equivalent of hard dollars—was
given them in an adjoining house.

Wanting in civility, as the conduct of the English missionaries may be
thought, in withholding a decent reception to these persons, the latter
were certainly to blame in needlessly placing themselves in so
unpleasant a predicament. Under far better auspices, they might have
settled upon some one of the thousand unconverted isles of the Pacific,
rather than have forced themselves thus upon a people already
professedly Christians.




CHAPTER XXXIII.
WE RECEIVE CALLS AT THE HOTEL DE CALABOOZA


Our place of confinement being open all round, and so near the Broom
Road, of course we were in plain sight of everybody passing; and,
therefore, we had no lack of visitors among such an idle, inquisitive
set as the Tahitians. For a few days, they were coming and going
continually; while, thus ignobly fast by the foot, we were fain to give
passive audience.

During this period, we were the lions of the neighbourhood; and, no
doubt, strangers from the distant villages were taken to see the
“Karhowrees” (white men), in the same way that countrymen, in a city,
are gallanted to the Zoological Gardens.

All this gave us a fine opportunity of making observations. I was
painfully struck by the considerable number of sickly or deformed
persons; undoubtedly made so by a virulent complaint, which, under
native treatment, almost invariably affects, in the end, the muscles
and bones of the body. In particular, there is a distortion of the
back, most unsightly to behold, originating in a horrible form of the
malady.

Although this, and other bodily afflictions, were unknown before the
discovery of the islands by the whites, there are several cases found
of the Fa-Fa, or Elephantiasis—a native disease, which seems to have
prevailed among them from the earliest antiquity. Affecting the legs
and feet alone, it swells them, in some instances, to the girth of a
man’s body, covering the skin with scales. It might be supposed that
one, thus afflicted, would be incapable of walking; but, to all
appearance, they seem to be nearly as active as anybody; apparently
suffering no pain, and bearing the calamity with a degree of
cheerfulness truly marvellous.

The Fa-Fa is very gradual in its approaches, and years elapse before
the limb is fully swollen. Its origin is ascribed by the natives to
various causes; but the general impression seems to be that it arises,
in most cases, from the eating of unripe bread-fruit and Indian turnip.
So far as I could find out, it is not hereditary. In no stage do they
attempt a cure; the complaint being held incurable.

Speaking of the Fa-Fa reminds me of a poor fellow, a sailor, whom I
afterward saw at Roorootoo, a lone island, some two days’ sail from
Tahiti.

The island is very small, and its inhabitants nearly extinct. We sent a
boat off to see whether any yams were to be had, as, formerly, the yams
of Roorootoo were as famous among the islands round about, as Sicily
oranges in the Mediterranean. Going ashore, to my surprise, I was
accosted, near a little shanty of a church, by a white man, who limped
forth from a wretched hut. His hair and beard were unshorn, his face
deadly pale and haggard, and one limb swelled with the Fa-Fa to an
incredible bigness. This was the first instance of a foreigner
suffering from it that I had ever seen, or heard of; and the spectacle
shocked me accordingly.

He had been there for years. From the first symptoms, he could not
believe his complaint to be what it really was, and trusted it would
soon disappear. But when it became plain that his only chance for
recovery was a speedy change of climate, no ship would receive him as a
sailor: to think of being taken as a passenger was idle. This speaks
little for the humanity of sea captains; but the truth is that those in
the Pacific have little enough of the virtue; and, nowadays, when so
many charitable appeals are made to them, they have become callous.

I pitied the poor fellow from the bottom of my heart; but nothing could
I do, as our captain was inexorable. “Why,” said he, “here we
are—started on a six months’ cruise—I can’t put back; and he is better
off on the island than at sea. So on Roorootoo he must die.” And
probably he did.

I afterwards heard of this melancholy object, from two seamen. His
attempts to leave were still unavailing, and his hard fate was fast
closing in.

Notwithstanding the physical degeneracy of the Tahitians as a people,
among the chiefs, individuals of personable figures are still
frequently met with; and, occasionally, majestic-looking men, and
diminutive women as lovely as the nymphs who, nearly a century ago,
swam round the ships of Wallis. In these instances, Tahitian beauty is
quite as seducing as it proved to the crew of the Bounty; the young
girls being just such creatures as a poet would picture in the
tropics—soft, plump, and dreamy-eyed.

The natural complexion of both sexes is quite light; but the males
appear much darker, from their exposure to the sun. A dark complexion,
however, in a man, is highly esteemed, as indicating strength of both
body and soul. Hence there is a saying, of great antiquity among them.

“If dark the cheek of the mother, The son will sound the war-conch; If
strong her frame, he will give laws.”

With this idea of manliness, no wonder the Tahitians regarded all pale
and tepid-looking Europeans as weak and feminine; whereas, a sailor,
with a cheek like the breast of a roast turkey, is held a lad of brawn:
to use their own phrase, a “taata tona,” or man of bones.

Speaking of bones recalls an ugly custom of theirs, now obsolete—that
of making fish-hooks and gimlets out of those of their enemies. This
beats the Scandinavians turning people’s skulls into cups and saucers.

But to return to the Calabooza Beretanee. Immense was the interest we
excited among the throngs that called there; they would stand talking
about us by the hour, growing most unnecessarily excited too, and
dancing up and down with all the vivacity of their race. They
invariably sided with us; flying out against the consul, and denouncing
him as “Ita maitai nuee,” or very bad exceedingly. They must have borne
him some grudge or other.

Nor were the women, sweet souls, at all backward in visiting. Indeed,
they manifested even more interest than the men; gazing at us with eyes
full of a thousand meanings, and conversing with marvellous rapidity.
But, alas! inquisitive though they were, and, doubtless, taking some
passing compassion on us, there was little real feeling in them after
all, and still less sentimental sympathy. Many of them laughed outright
at us, noting only what was ridiculous in our plight.

I think it was the second day of our confinement that a wild, beautiful
girl burst into the Calabooza, and, throwing herself into an arch
attitude, stood afar off, and gazed at us. She was a heartless
one:—tickled to death with Black Dan’s nursing his chafed ankle, and
indulging in certain moral reflections on the consul and Captain Guy.
After laughing her fill at him, she condescended to notice the rest;
glancing from one to another in the most methodical and provoking
manner imaginable. Whenever anything struck her comically, you saw it
like a flash—her finger levelled instantaneously, and, flinging herself
back, she gave loose to strange, hollow little notes of laughter, that
sounded like the bass of a music-box, playing a lively air with the lid
down.

Now, I knew not that there was anything in my own appearance calculated
to disarm ridicule; and indeed, to have looked at all heroic, under the
circumstances, would have been rather difficult. Still, I could not but
feel exceedingly annoyed at the prospect of being screamed at, in turn,
by this mischievous young witch, even though she were but an islander.
And, to tell a secret, her beauty had something to do with this sort of
feeling; and, pinioned as I was to a log, and clad most unbecomingly, I
began to grow sentimental.

Ere her glance fell upon me, I had, unconsciously, thrown myself into
the most graceful attitude I could assume, leaned my head upon my hand,
and summoned up as abstracted an expression as possible. Though my face
was averted, I soon felt it flush, and knew that the glance was on me;
deeper and deeper grew the flush, and not a sound of laughter.

Delicious thought! she was moved at the sight of me. I could stand it
no longer, but started up. Lo! there she was; her great hazel eyes
rounding and rounding in her head, like two stars, her whole frame in a
merry quiver, and an expression about the mouth that was sudden and
violent death to anything like sentiment.

The next moment she spun round, and, bursting from peal to peal of
laughter, went racing out of the Calabooza; and, in mercy to me, never
returned.




CHAPTER XXXIV.
LIFE AT THE CALABOOZA


A few days passed; and, at last, our docility was rewarded by some
indulgence on the part of Captain Bob.

He allowed the entire party to be at large during the day; only
enjoining upon us always to keep within hail. This, to be sure, was in
positive disobedience to Wilson’s orders; and so, care had to be taken
that he should not hear of it. There was little fear of the natives
telling him; but strangers travelling the Broom Road might. By way of
precaution, boys were stationed as scouts along the road. At sight of a
white man, they sounded the alarm! when we all made for our respective
holes (the stocks being purposely left open): the beam then descended,
and we were prisoners. As soon as the traveller was out of sight, of
course, we were liberated.

Notwithstanding the regular supply of food which we obtained from
Captain Bob and his friends, it was so small that we often felt most
intolerably hungry. We could not blame them for not bringing us more,
for we soon became aware that they had to pinch themselves in order to
give us what they did; besides, they received nothing for their
kindness but the daily bucket of bread.

Among a people like the Tahitians, what we call “hard times” can only
be experienced in the scarcity of edibles; yet, so destitute are many
of the common people that this most distressing consequence of
civilization may be said, with them, to be ever present. To be sure,
the natives about the Calabooza had abundance of limes and oranges; but
what were these good for, except to impart a still keener edge to
appetites which there was so little else to gratify? During the height
of the bread-fruit season, they fare better; but, at other times, the
demands of the shipping exhaust the uncultivated resources of the
island; and the lands being mostly owned by the chiefs, the inferior
orders have to suffer for their cupidity. Deprived of their nets, many
of them would starve.

As Captain Bob insensibly remitted his watchfulness, and we began to
stroll farther and farther from the Calabooza, we managed, by a
systematic foraging upon the country round about, to make up some of
our deficiencies. And fortunate it was that the houses of the wealthier
natives were just as open to us as those of the most destitute; we were
treated as kindly in one as the other.

Once in a while, we came in at the death of a chiefs pig; the noise of
whose slaughtering was generally to be heard at a great distance. An
occasion like this gathers the neighbours together, and they have a bit
of a feast, where a stranger is always welcome. A good loud squeal,
therefore, was music in our ears. It showed something going on in that
direction.

Breaking in upon the party tumultuously, as we did, we always created a
sensation. Sometimes, we found the animal still alive and struggling;
in which case, it was generally dropped at our approach.

To provide for these emergencies, Flash Jack generally repaired to the
scene of operations with a sheath-knife between his teeth, and a club
in his hand. Others were exceedingly officious in singeing off the
bristles, and disembowelling. Doctor Long Ghost and myself, however,
never meddled with these preliminaries, but came to the feast itself
with unimpaired energies.

Like all lank men, my long friend had an appetite of his own. Others
occasionally went about seeking what they might devour, but he was
always on the alert.

He had an ingenious way of obviating an inconvenience which we all
experienced at times. The islanders seldom use salt with their food; so
he begged Rope Yarn to bring him some from the ship; also a little
pepper, if he could; which, accordingly, was done. This he placed in a
small leather wallet—a “monkey bag” (so called by sailors)—usually worn
as a purse about the neck.

“In my opinion,” said Long Ghost, as he tucked the wallet out of sight,
“it behooves a stranger, in Tahiti, to have his knife in readiness, and
his castor slung.”




CHAPTER XXXV.
VISIT FROM AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE


We had not been many days ashore, when Doctor Johnson was espied coming
along the Broom Road.

We had heard that he meditated a visit, and suspected what he was
after. Being upon the consul’s hands, all our expenses were of course
payable by him in his official capacity; and, therefore, as a friend of
Wilson, and sure of good pay, the shore doctor had some idea of
allowing us to run up a bill with him. True, it was rather awkward to
ask us to take medicines which, on board the ship, he told us were not
needed. However, he resolved to put a bold face on the matter, and give
us a call.

His approach was announced by one of the scouts, upon which someone
suggested that we should let him enter, and then put him in the stocks.
But Long Ghost proposed better sport. What it was, we shall presently
see.

Very bland and amiable, Doctor Johnson advanced, and, resting his cane
on the stocks, glanced to right and left, as we lay before him. “Well,
my lads”—he began—“how do you find yourselves to-day?”

Looking very demure, the men made some rejoinder; and he went on.

“Those poor fellows I saw the other day—the sick, I mean—how are they?”
and he scrutinized the company. At last, he singled out one who was
assuming a most unearthly appearance, and remarked that he looked as if
he were extremely ill. “Yes,” said the sailor dolefully, “I’m afeard,
doctor, I’ll soon be losing the number of my mess!” (a sea phrase, for
departing this life) and he closed his eyes, and moaned.

“What does he say?” said Johnson, turning round eagerly.

“Why,” exclaimed Flash Jack, who volunteered as interpreter, “he means
he’s going to croak” (die).

“Croak! and what does that mean, applied to a patient?”

“Oh! I understand,” said he, when the word was explained; and he
stepped over the stocks, and felt the man’s pulse.

“What’s his name?” he asked, turning this time to old Navy Bob.

“We calls him Jingling Joe,” replied that worthy.

“Well then, men, you must take good care of poor Joseph; and I will
send him a powder, which must be taken according to the directions.
Some of you know how to read, I presume?”

“That ere young cove does,” replied Bob, pointing toward the place
where I lay, as if he were directing attention to a sail at sea.

After examining the rest—some of whom were really invalids, but
convalescent, and others only pretending to be labouring under divers
maladies, Johnson turned round, and addressed the party.

“Men,” said he, “if any more of you are ailing, speak up, and let me
know. By order of the consul, I’m to call every day; so if any of you
are at all sick, it’s my duty to prescribe for you. This sudden change
from ship fare to shore living plays the deuce with you sailors, so be
cautious about eating fruit. Good-day! I’ll send you the medicines the
first thing in the morning.”

Now, I am inclined to suspect that with all his want of understanding,
Johnson must have had some idea that we were quizzing him. Still, that
was nothing, so long as it answered his purpose; and therefore, if he
did see through us, he never showed it.

Sure enough, at the time appointed, along came a native lad with a
small basket of cocoa-nut stalks, filled with powders, pill-boxes,
and-vials, each with names and directions written in a large, round
hand. The sailors, one and all, made a snatch at the collection, under
the strange impression that some of the vials were seasoned with
spirits. But, asserting his privilege as physician to the first reading
of the labels, Doctor Long Ghost was at last permitted to take
possession of the basket.

The first thing lighted upon was a large vial, labelled—“For
William—rub well in.”

This vial certainly had a spirituous smell; and upon handing it to the
patient, he made a summary internal application of its contents. The
doctor looked aghast.

There was now a mighty commotion. Powders and pills were voted mere
drugs in the market, and the holders of vials were pronounced lucky
dogs. Johnson must have known enough of sailors to make some of his
medicines palatable—this, at least, Long Ghost suspected. Certain it
was, everyone took to the vials; if at all spicy, directions were
unheeded, their contents all going one road.

The largest one of all, quite a bottle indeed, and having a sort of
burnt brandy odour, was labelled—“For Daniel, drink freely, and until
relieved.” This Black Dan proceeded to do; and would have made an end
of it at once, had not the bottle, after a hard struggle, been snatched
from his hands, and passed round, like a jovial decanter. The old tar
had complained of the effects of an immoderate eating of fruit.

Upon calling the following morning, our physician found his precious
row of patients reclining behind the stocks, and doing “as well as
could be expected.”

But the pills and powders were found to have been perfectly inactive:
probably because none had been taken. To make them efficacious, it was
suggested that, for the future, a bottle of Pisco should be sent along
with them. According to Flash Jack’s notions, unmitigated medical
compounds were but dry stuff at the best, and needed something good to
wash them down.

Thus far, our own M.D., Doctor Long Ghost, after starting the frolic,
had taken no further part in it; but on the physician’s third visit, he
took him to one side, and had a private confabulation. What it was,
exactly, we could not tell; but from certain illustrative signs and
gestures, I fancied that he was describing the symptoms of some
mysterious disorganization of the vitals, which must have come on
within the hour. Assisted by his familiarity with medical terms, he
seemed to produce a marked impression. At last, Johnson went his way,
promising aloud that he would send Long Ghost what he desired.

When the medicine boy came along the following morning, the doctor was
the first to accost him, walking off with a small purple vial. This
time, there was little else in the basket but a case-bottle of the
burnt brandy cordial, which, after much debate, was finally disposed of
by someone pouring the contents, little by little, into the half of a
cocoa-nut shell, and so giving all who desired a glass. No further
medicinal cheer remaining, the men dispersed.

An hour or two passed, when Flash Jack directed attention to my long
friend, who, since the medicine boy left, had not been noticed till
now. With eyes closed, he was lying behind the stocks, and Jack was
lifting his arm and letting it fall as if life were extinct. On running
up with the rest, I at once connected the phenomenon with the
mysterious vial. Searching his pocket, I found it, and holding it up,
it proved to be laudanum. Flash Jack, snatching it from my hand in a
rapture, quickly informed all present what it was; and with much glee,
proposed a nap for the company. Some of them not comprehending him
exactly, the apparently defunct Long Ghost—who lay so still that I a
little suspected the genuineness of his sleep—was rolled about as an
illustration of the virtues of the vial’s contents. The idea tickled
everybody mightily; and throwing themselves down, the magic draught was
passed from hand to hand. Thinking that, as a matter of course, they
must at once become insensible, each man, upon taking his sip, fell
back, and closed his eyes.

There was little fear of the result, since the narcotic was equally
distributed. But, curious to see how it would operate, I raised myself
gently after a while, and looked around. It was about noon, and
perfectly still; and as we all daily took the siesta, I was not much
surprised to find everyone quiet. Still, in one or two instances, I
thought I detected a little peeping.

Presently, I heard a footstep, and saw Doctor Johnson approaching.

And perplexed enough did he look at the sight of his prostrate file of
patients, plunged, apparently, in such unaccountable slumbers.

“Daniel,” he cried, at last, punching in the side with his cane the
individual thus designated—“Daniel, my good fellow, get up! do you
hear?”

But Black Dan was immovable; and he poked the next sleeper.

“Joseph, Joseph! come, wake up! it’s me, Doctor Johnson.”

But Jingling Joe, with mouth open, and eyes shut, was not to be
started.

“Bless my soul!” he exclaimed, with uplifted hands and cane, “what’s
got into ’em? I say, men”—he shouted, running up and down—“come to
life, men! what under the sun’s the matter with you?” and he struck the
stocks, and bawled with increased vigour.

At last he paused, folded his hands over the head of his cane, and
steadfastly gazed upon us. The notes of the nasal orchestra were rising
and falling upon his ear, and a new idea suggested itself.

“Yes, yes; the rascals must have been getting boozy. Well, it’s none of
my business—I’ll be off;” and off he went.

No sooner was he out of sight, than nearly all started to their feet,
and a hearty laugh ensued.

Like myself, most of them had been watching the event from under a sly
eyelid. By this time, too, Doctor Long Ghost was as wide awake as
anybody. What were his reasons for taking laudanum,—if, indeed, he took
any whatever,—is best known to himself; and, as it is neither mine nor
the reader’s business, we will say no more about it.




CHAPTER XXXVI.
WE ARE CARRIED BEFORE THE CONSUL AND CAPTAIN


We had been inmates of the Calabooza Beretanee about two weeks, when,
one morning, Captain Bob, coming from the bath, in a state of utter
nudity, brought into the building an armful of old tappa, and began to
dress to go out.

The operation was quite simple. The tappa—of the coarsest kind—was in
one long, heavy piece; and, fastening one end to a column of Habiscus
wood supporting the Calabooza, he went off a few paces, and putting the
other about his waist, wound himself right up to the post. This unique
costume, in rotundity something like a farthingale, added immensely to
his large hulk; so much so that he fairly waddled in his gait. But he
was only adhering to the fashion of his fathers; for, in the olden
time, the “Kihee,” or big girdle, was quite the mode for both sexes.
Bob, despising recent innovations, still clung to it. He was a
gentleman of the old school—one of the last of the Kihees.

He now told us that he had orders to take us before the consul. Nothing
loth, we formed in procession; and, with the old man at our head,
sighing and labouring like an engine, and flanked by a guard of some
twenty natives, we started for the village.

Arrived at the consular office, we found Wilson there, and four or five
Europeans, seated in a row facing us; probably with the view of
presenting as judicial an appearance as possible.

On one side was a couch, where Captain Guy reclined. He looked
convalescent; and, as we found out, intended soon to go aboard his
ship. He said nothing, but left everything to the consul.

The latter now rose, and, drawing forth a paper from a large roll tied
with red tape, commenced reading aloud.

It purported to be, “the affidavit of John Jennin, first officer of the
British Colonial Barque Julia; Guy, Master;” and proved to be a long
statement of matters, from the time of leaving Sydney, down to our
arrival in the harbour. Though artfully drawn up so as to bear hard
against every one of us, it was pretty correct in the details;
excepting that it was wholly silent as to the manifold derelictions of
the mate himself—a fact which imparted unusual significance to the
concluding sentence, “And furthermore, this deponent sayeth not.”

No comments were made, although we all looked round for the mate to see
whether it was possible that he could have authorized this use of his
name. But he was not present.

The next document produced was the deposition of the captain himself.
As on all other occasions, however, he had very little to say for
himself, and it was soon set aside.

The third affidavit was that of the seamen remaining aboard the vessel,
including the traitor Bungs, who, it seemed, had turned ship’s
evidence. It was an atrocious piece of exaggeration, from beginning to
end; and those who signed it could not have known what they were about.
Certainly Wymontoo did not, though his mark was there. In vain the
consul commanded silence during the reading of this paper; comments
were shouted out upon every paragraph.

The affidavits read, Wilson, who, all the while, looked as stiff as a
poker, solemnly drew forth the ship’s articles from their tin case.
This document was a discoloured, musty, bilious-looking affair, and
hard to read. When finished, the consul held it up; and, pointing to
the marks of the ship’s company, at the bottom, asked us, one by one,
whether we acknowledged the same for our own.

“What’s the use of asking that?” said Black Dan; “Captain Guy there
knows as well as we they are.”

“Silence, sir!” said Wilson, who, intending to produce a suitable
impression by this ridiculous parade, was not a little mortified by the
old sailor’s bluntness.

A pause of a few moments now ensued; during which the bench of judges
communed with Captain Guy, in a low tone, and the sailors canvassed the
motives of the consul in having the affidavits taken.

The general idea seemed to be that it was done with a view of
“bouncing,” or frightening us into submission. Such proved to be the
case; for Wilson, rising to his feet again, addressed us as follows:—

“You see, men, that every preparation has been made to send you to
Sydney for trial. The Rosa (a small Australian schooner, lying in the
harbour) will sail for that place in the course of ten days, at
farthest. The Julia sails on a cruise this day week. Do you still
refuse duty?”

We did.

Hereupon the consul and captain exchanged glances; and the latter
looked bitterly disappointed.

Presently I noticed Guy’s eye upon me; and, for the first time, he
spoke, and told me to come near. I stepped forward.

“Was it not you that was taken off the island?”

“It was.”

“It was you then who owe your life to my humanity. Yet this is the
gratitude of a sailor, Mr. Wilson!”

“Not so, sir.” And I at once gave him to understand that I was
perfectly acquainted with his motives in sending a boat into the bay;
his crew was reduced, and he merely wished to procure the sailor whom
he expected to find there. The ship was the means of my deliverance,
and no thanks to the benevolence of its captain.

Doctor Long Ghost also had a word to say. In two masterly sentences he
summed up Captain Guy’s character, to the complete satisfaction of
every seaman present.

Matters were now growing serious; especially as the sailors became
riotous, and talked about taking the consul and the captain back to the
Calabooza with them.

The other judges fidgeted, and loudly commanded silence. It was at
length restored; when Wilson, for the last time addressing us, said
something more about the Rose and Sydney, and concluded by reminding us
that a week would elapse ere the Julia sailed.

Leaving these hints to operate for themselves, he dismissed the party,
ordering Captain Bob and his friends to escort us back whence we came.




CHAPTER XXXVII.
THE FRENCH PRIESTS PAY THEIR RESPECTS


A day or two after the events just related, we were lounging in the
Calabooza Beretanee, when we were honoured by a visit from three of the
French Priests; and as about the only notice ever taken of us by the
English missionaries was their leaving their cards for us, in the shape
of a package of tracts, we could not help thinking that the Frenchmen,
in making a personal call, were at least much better bred.

By this time they had settled themselves down quite near our
habitation. A pleasant little stroll down the Broom Road, and a rustic
cross peeped through the trees; and soon you came to as charming a
place as one would wish to see: a soft knoll, planted with old
breadfruit trees; in front, a savannah, sloping to a grove of palms,
and, between these, glimpses of blue, sunny waves.

On the summit of the knoll was a rude chapel, of bamboos; quite small,
and surmounted by the cross. Between the canes, at nightfall, the
natives stole peeps at a small portable altar; a crucifix to
correspond, and gilded candlesticks and censers. Their curiosity
carried them no further; nothing could induce them to worship there.
Such queer ideas as they entertained of the hated strangers. Masses and
chants were nothing more than evil spells. As for the priests
themselves, they were no better than diabolical sorcerers; like those
who, in old times, terrified their fathers.

Close by the chapel was a range of native houses; rented from a chief,
and handsomely furnished. Here lived the priests; and very comfortably,
too. They looked sanctimonious enough abroad; but that went for
nothing; since, at home, in their retreat, they were a club of Friar
Tucks; holding priestly wassail over many a good cup of red brandy, and
rising late in the morning.

Pity it was they couldn’t marry—pity for the ladies of the island, I
mean, and the cause of morality; for what business had the
ecclesiastical old bachelors with such a set of trim little native
handmaidens? These damsels were their first converts; and devoted ones
they were.

The priests, as I have said before, were accounted necromancers: the
appearance of two of our three visitors might have justified the
conceit.

They were little, dried-up Frenchmen, in long, straight gowns of black
cloth, and unsightly three-cornered hats—so preposterously big that, in
putting them on, the reverend fathers seemed to extinguish themselves.

Their companion was dressed differently. He wore a sort of yellow,
flannel morning gown, and a broad-brimmed Manilla hat. Large and
portly, he was also hale and fifty; with a complexion like an autumnal
leaf—handsome blue eyes—fine teeth, and a racy Milesian brogue. In
short, he was an Irishman; Father Murphy, by name; and, as such, pretty
well known, and very thoroughly disliked, throughout all the Protestant
missionary settlements in Polynesia. In early youth, he had been sent
to a religious seminary in France; and, taking orders there, had but
once or twice afterwards revisited his native land.

Father Murphy marched up to us briskly; and the first words he uttered
were, to ask whether there were any of his countrymen among us. There
were two of them; one, a lad of sixteen—a bright, curly-headed
rascal—and, being a young Irishman, of course, his name was Pat. The
other was an ugly, and rather melancholy-looking scamp; one M’Gee,
whose prospects in life had been blasted by a premature transportation
to Sydney. This was the report, at least, though it might have been
scandal.

In most of my shipmates were some redeeming qualities; but about M’Gee,
there was nothing of the kind; and forced to consort with him, I could
not help regretting, a thousand times, that the gallows had been so
tardy. As if impelled, against her will, to send him into the world,
Nature had done all she could to insure his being taken for what he
was. About the eyes there was no mistaking him; with a villainous cast
in one, they seemed suspicious of each other.

Glancing away from him at once, the bluff priest rested his gaze on the
good-humoured face of Pat, who, with a pleasant roguishness, was
“twigging” the enormous hats (or “Hytee Belteezers,” as land beavers
are called by sailors), from under which, like a couple of snails,
peeped the two little Frenchmen.

Pat and the priest were both from the same town in Meath; and, when
this was found out, there was no end to the questions of the latter. To
him, Pat seemed a letter from home, and said a hundred times as much.

After a long talk between these two, and a little broken English from
the Frenchmen, our visitors took leave; but Father Murphy had hardly
gone a dozen rods when back he came, inquiring whether we were in want
of anything.

“Yes,” cried one, “something to eat.” Upon this he promised to send us
some fresh wheat bread, of his own baking; a great luxury in Tahiti.

We all felicitated Pat upon picking up such a friend, and told him his
fortune was made.

The next morning, a French servant of the priest’s made his appearance
with a small bundle of clothing for our young Hibernian; and the
promised bread for the party. Pat being out at the knees and elbows,
and, like the rest of us, not full inside, the present was acceptable
all round.

In the afternoon, Father Murphy himself came along; and, in addition to
his previous gifts, gave Pat a good deal of advice: said he was sorry
to see him in limbo, and that he would have a talk with the consul
about having him set free.

We saw nothing more of him for two or three days; at the end of which
time he paid us another call, telling Pat that Wilson was inexorable,
having refused to set him at liberty, unless to go aboard the ship.
This, the priest now besought him to do forthwith; and so escape the
punishment which, it seems, Wilson had been hinting at to his
intercessor. Pat, however, was staunch against entreaties; and, with
all the ardour of a sophomorean sailor, protested his intention to hold
out to the last. With none of the meekness of a good little boy about
him, the blunt youngster stormed away at such a rate that it was hard
to pacify him; and the priest said no more.

How it came to pass—whether from Murphy’s speaking to the consul, or
otherwise, we could not tell—but the next day, Pat was sent for by
Wilson, and being escorted to the village by our good old keeper, three
days elapsed before he returned.

Bent upon reclaiming him, they had taken him on board the ship; feasted
him in the cabin; and, finding that of no avail, down they thrust him
into the hold, in double irons, and on bread and water. All would not
do; and so he was sent back to the Calabooza. Boy that he was, they
must have counted upon his being more susceptible to discipline than
the rest.

The interest felt in Pat’s welfare, by his benevolent countryman, was
very serviceable to the rest of us; especially as we all turned
Catholics, and went to mass every morning, much to Captain Bob’s
consternation. Upon finding it out, he threatened to keep us in the
stocks if we did not desist. He went no farther than this, though; and
so, every few days, we strolled down to the priest’s residence, and had
a mouthful to eat, and something generous to drink. In particular, Dr.
Long Ghost and myself became huge favourites with Pat’s friend; and
many a time he regaled us from a quaint-looking travelling case for
spirits, stowed away in one corner of his dwelling. It held four square
flasks, which, somehow or other, always contained just enough to need
emptying. In truth, the fine old Irishman was a rosy fellow in
canonicals. His countenance and his soul were always in a glow. It may
be ungenerous to reveal his failings, but he often talked thick, and
sometimes was perceptibly eccentric in his gait.

I never drink French brandy but I pledge Father Murphy. His health
again! And many jolly proselytes may he make in Polynesia!




CHAPTER XXXVIII.
LITTLE JULIA SAILS WITHOUT US


To make good the hint thrown out by the consul upon the conclusion of
the Farce of the Affidavits, we were again brought before him within
the time specified.

It was the same thing over again: he got nothing out of us, and we were
remanded; our resolute behaviour annoying him prodigiously.

What we observed led us to form the idea that, on first learning the
state of affairs on board the Julia, Wilson must have addressed his
invalid friend, the captain, something in the following style:

“Guy, my poor fellow, don’t worry yourself now about those rascally
sailors of yours. I’ll dress them out for you—just leave it all to me,
and set your mind at rest.”

But handcuffs and stocks, big looks, threats, dark hints, and
depositions, had all gone for nought.

Conscious that, as matters now stood, nothing serious could grow out of
what had happened; and never dreaming that our being sent home for
trial had ever been really thought of, we thoroughly understood Wilson,
and laughed at him accordingly.

Since leaving the Julia, we had caught no glimpse of the mate; but we
often heard of him.

It seemed that he remained on board, keeping house in the cabin for
himself and Viner; who, going to see him according to promise, was
induced to remain a guest. These two cronies now had fine times;
tapping the captain’s quarter-casks, playing cards on the transom, and
giving balls of an evening to the ladies ashore. In short, they cut up
so many queer capers that the missionaries complained of them to the
consul; and Jermin received a sharp reprimand.

This so affected him that he still drank more freely than before; and
one afternoon, when mellow as a grape, he took umbrage at a canoe full
of natives, who, on being hailed from the deck to come aboard and show
their papers, got frightened, and paddled for the shore.

Lowering a boat instantly, he equipped Wymontoo and the Dane with a
cutlass apiece, and seizing another himself, off they started in
pursuit, the ship’s ensign flying in the boat’s stern. The alarmed
islanders, beaching their canoe, with loud cries fled through the
village, the mate after them, slashing his naked weapon to right and
left. A crowd soon collected; and the “Karhowree toonee,” or crazy
stranger, was quickly taken before Wilson.

Now, it so chanced that, in a native house hard by, the consul and
Captain Guy were having a quiet game at cribbage by themselves, a
decanter on the table standing sentry. The obstreperous Jermin was
brought in; and finding the two thus pleasantly occupied, it had a
soothing effect upon him; and he insisted upon taking a hand at the
cards, and a drink of the brandy. As the consul was nearly as tipsy as
himself, and the captain dared not object for fear of giving offence,
at it they went—all three of them—and made a night of it; the mate’s
delinquencies being summarily passed over, and his captors sent away.

An incident worth relating grew out of this freak.

There wandered about Papeetee, at this time, a shrivelled little fright
of an Englishwoman, known among sailors as “Old Mother Tot.” From New
Zealand to the Sandwich Islands, she had been all over the South Seas;
keeping a rude hut of entertainment for mariners, and supplying them
with rum and dice. Upon the missionary islands, of course, such conduct
was severely punishable; and at various places, Mother Tot’s
establishment had been shut up, and its proprietor made to quit in the
first vessel that could be hired to land her elsewhere. But, with a
perseverance invincible, wherever she went she always started afresh;
and so became notorious everywhere.

By some wicked spell of hers, a patient, one-eyed little cobbler
followed her about, mending shoes for white men, doing the old woman’s
cooking, and bearing all her abuse without grumbling. Strange to
relate, a battered Bible was seldom out of his sight; and whenever he
had leisure, and his mistress’ back was turned, he was forever poring
over it. This pious propensity used to enrage the old crone past
belief; and oftentimes she boxed his ears with the book, and tried to
burn it. Mother Tot and her man Josy were, indeed, a curious pair.

But to my story.

A week or so after our arrival in the harbour, the old lady had once
again been hunted down, and forced for the time to abandon her
nefarious calling. This was brought about chiefly by Wilson, who, for
some reason unknown, had contracted the most violent hatred for her;
which, on her part, was more than reciprocated.

Well: passing, in the evening, where the consul and his party were
making merry, she peeped through the bamboos of the house; and
straightway resolved to gratify her spite.

The night was very dark; and providing herself with a huge ship’s
lantern, which usually swung in her hut, she waited till they came
forth. This happened about midnight; Wilson making his appearance,
supported by two natives, holding him up by the arms. These three went
first; and just as they got under a deep shade, a bright light was
thrust within an inch of Wilson’s nose. The old hag was kneeling before
him, holding the lantern with uplifted hands.

“Ha, ha! my fine counsellor,” she shrieked; “ye persecute a lone old
body like me for selling rum—do ye? And here ye are, carried home
drunk—Hoot! ye villain, I scorn ye!” And she spat upon him.

Terrified at the apparition, the poor natives—arrant believers in
ghosts—dropped the trembling consul, and fled in all directions. After
giving full vent to her rage, Mother Tot hobbled away, and left the
three revellers to stagger home the best way they could.

The day following our last interview with Wilson, we learned that
Captain Guy had gone on board his vessel for the purpose of shipping a
new crew. There was a round bounty offered; and a heavy bag of Spanish
dollars, with the Julia’s articles ready for signing, were laid on the
capstan-head.

Now, there was no lack of idle sailors ashore, mostly “Beachcombers,”
who had formed themselves into an organized gang, headed by one Mack, a
Scotchman, whom they styled the Commodore. By the laws of the
fraternity, no member was allowed to ship on board a vessel unless
granted permission by the rest. In this way the gang controlled the
port, all discharged seamen being forced to join them.

To Mack and his men our story was well known; indeed, they had several
times called to see us; and of course, as sailors and congenial
spirits, they were hard against Captain Guy.

Deeming the matter important, they came in a body to the Calabooza, and
wished to know whether, all things considered, we thought it best for
any of them to join the Julia.

Anxious to pack the ship off as soon as possible, we answered, by all
means. Some went so far as to laud the Julia to the skies as the best
and fastest of ships. Jermin too, as a good fellow, and a sailor every
inch, came in for his share of praise; and as for the captain—quiet
man, he would never trouble anyone. In short, every inducement we could
think of was presented; and Flash Jack ended by assuring the
beachcombers solemnly that, now we were all well and hearty, nothing
but a regard to principle prevented us from returning on board
ourselves.

The result was that a new crew was finally obtained, together with a
steady New Englander for second mate, and three good whalemen for
harpooners. In part, what was wanting for the ship’s larder was also
supplied; and as far as could be done in a place like Tahiti, the
damages the vessel had sustained were repaired. As for the Mowree, the
authorities refusing to let him be put ashore, he was carried to sea in
irons, down in the hold. What eventually became of him we never heard.

Ropey, poor poor Ropey, who a few days previous had fallen sick, was
left ashore at the sailor hospital at Townor, a small place upon the
beach between Papeetee and Matavai. Here, some time after, he breathed
his last. No one knew his complaint: he must have died of hard times.
Several of us saw him interred in the sand, and I planted a rude post
to mark his resting-place.

The cooper, and the rest who had remained aboard from the first, of
course, composed part of the Julia’s new crew.

To account for the conduct, all along, of the consul and captain, in
trying so hard to alter our purpose with respect to the ship, the
following statement is all that is requisite. Beside an advance of from
fifteen to twenty-five dollars demanded by every sailor shipping at
Tahiti, an additional sum for each man so shipped has to be paid into
the hands of the government, as a charge of the port. Beside this, the
men—with here and there an exception—will only ship for one cruise,
thus becoming entitled to a discharge before the vessel reaches home;
which, in time, creates the necessity of obtaining other men, at a
similar cost. Now, the Julia’s exchequer was at low-water mark, or
rather, it was quite empty; and to meet these expenses, a good part of
what little oil there was aboard had to be sold for a song to a
merchant of Papeetee.

It was Sunday in Tahiti and a glorious morning, when Captain Bob,
waddling into the Calabooza, startled us by announcing “Ah—my
boy—shippy you, harre—maky sail!” In other words, the Julia was off.

The beach was quite near, and in this quarter altogether uninhabited;
so down we ran, and, at cable’s length, saw little Jule gliding
past—top-gallant-sails hoisting, and a boy aloft with one leg thrown
over the yard, loosing the fore-royal. The decks were all life and
commotion; the sailors on the forecastle singing “Ho, cheerly men!” as
they catted the anchor; and the gallant Jennin, bare-headed as his
wont, standing up on the bowsprit, and issuing his orders. By the man
at the helm stood Captain Guy, very quiet and gentlemanly, and smoking
a cigar.

Soon the ship drew near the reef, and, altering her course, glided out
through the break, and went on her way.

Thus disappeared little Jule, about three weeks after entering the
harbour: and nothing more have I ever heard of her.




CHAPTER XXXIX.
JERMIN SERVES US A GOOD TURN—FRIENDSHIPS IN POLYNESIA


The ship out of the way, we were quite anxious to know what was going
to be done with us. On this head, Captain Bob could tell us nothing; no
further, at least, than that he still considered himself responsible
for our safe-keeping. However, he never put us to bed any more; and we
had everything our own way.

The day after the Julia left, the old man came up to us in great
tribulation, saying that the bucket of bread was no longer forthcoming,
and that Wilson had refused to send anything in its place. One and all,
we took this for a hint to disperse quietly, and go about our business.
Nevertheless, we were not to be shaken off so easily; and taking a
malicious pleasure in annoying our old enemy, we resolved, for the
present, to stay where we were. For the part he had been acting, we
learned that the consul was the laughing-stock of all the foreigners
ashore, who frequently twitted him upon his hopeful proteges of the
Calabooza Beretanee.

As we were wholly without resources, so long as we remained on the
island no better place than Captain Bob’s could be selected for an
abiding-place. Beside, we heartily loved the old gentleman, and could
not think of leaving him; so, telling him to give no thought as to
wherewithal we should be clothed and fed, we resolved, by extending and
systematizing our foraging operations, to provide for ourselves.

We were greatly assisted by a parting legacy of Jermin’s. To him we
were indebted for having all our chests sent ashore, and everything
left therein. They were placed in the custody of a petty chief living
near by, who was instructed by the consul not to allow them to be taken
away; but we might call and make our toilets whenever we pleased.

We went to see Mahinee, the old chief; Captain Bob going along, and
stoutly insisting upon having the chattels delivered up. At last this
was done; and in solemn procession the chests were borne by the natives
to the Calabooza. Here, we disposed them about quite tastefully; and
made such a figure that, in the eyes of old Bob and his friends, the
Calabooza Beretanee was by far the most sumptuously furnished saloon in
Tahiti.

Indeed, so long as it remained thus furnished, the native courts of the
district were held there; the judge, Mahinee, and his associates,
sitting upon one of the chests, and the culprits and spectators thrown
at full length upon the ground, both inside of the building and under
the shade of the trees without; while, leaning over the stocks as from
a gallery, the worshipful crew of the Julia looked on, and canvassed
the proceedings.

I should have mentioned before that, previous to the vessel’s
departure, the men had bartered away all the clothing they could
possibly spare; but now, it was resolved to be more provident.

The contents of the chests were of the most miscellaneous
description:—sewing utensils, marling-spikes, strips of calico, bits of
rope, jack-knives; nearly everything, in short, that a seaman could
think of. But of wearing apparel, there was little but old frocks,
remnants of jackets, and legs of trousers, with now and then the foot
of a stocking.

These, however, were far from being valueless; for, among the poorer
Tahitians, everything European is highly esteemed. They come from
“Beretanee, Fenooa Pararee” (Britain, Land of Wonders), and that is
enough.

The chests themselves were deemed exceedingly precious, especially
those with unfractured looks, which would absolutely click, and enable
the owner to walk off with the key. Scars, however, and bruises, were
considered great blemishes. One old fellow, smitten with the doctor’s
large mahogany chest (a well-filled one, by the bye), and finding
infinite satisfaction in merely sitting thereon, was detected in the
act of applying a healing ointment to a shocking scratch which impaired
the beauty of the lid.

There is no telling the love of a Tahitian for a sailor’s trunk. So
ornamental is it held as an article of furniture in the hut, that the
women are incessantly tormenting their husbands to bestir themselves
and make them a present of one. When obtained, no pier-table just
placed in a drawing-room is regarded with half the delight. For these
reasons, then, our coming into possession of our estate at this time
was an important event.

The islanders are much like the rest of the world; and the news of our
good fortune brought us troops of “tayos,” or friends, eager to form an
alliance after the national custom, and do our slightest bidding.

The really curious way in which all the Polynesians are in the habit of
making bosom friends at the shortest possible notice is deserving of
remark. Although, among a people like the Tahitians, vitiated as they
are by sophisticating influences, this custom has in most cases
degenerated into a mere mercenary relation, it nevertheless had its
origin in a fine, and in some instances, heroic sentiment, formerly
entertained by their fathers.

In the annals of the island are examples of extravagant friendships,
unsurpassed by the story of Damon and Pythias: in truth, much more
wonderful; for, notwithstanding the devotion—even of life in some
cases—to which they led, they were frequently entertained at first
sight for some stranger from another island.

Filled with love and admiration for the first whites who came among
them, the Polynesians could not testify the warmth of their emotions
more strongly than by instantaneously making their abrupt proffer of
friendship. Hence, in old voyages we read of chiefs coming off from the
shore in their canoes, and going through with strange antics,
expressive of the desire. In the same way, their inferiors accosted the
seamen; and thus the practice has continued in some islands down to the
present day.

There is a small place, not many days’ sail from Tahiti, and seldom
visited by shipping, where the vessel touched to which I then happened
to belong.

Of course, among the simple-hearted natives, We had a friend all round.
Mine was Poky, a handsome youth, who never could do enough for me.
Every morning at sunrise, his canoe came alongside loaded with fruits
of all kinds; upon being emptied, it was secured by a line to the
bowsprit, under which it lay all day long, ready at any time to carry
its owner ashore on an errand.

Seeing him so indefatigable, I told Poky one day that I was a virtuoso
in shells and curiosities of all kinds. That was enough; away he
paddled for the head of the bay, and I never saw him again for
twenty-four hours. The next morning, his canoe came gliding slowly
along the shore with the full-leaved bough of a tree for a sail. For
the purpose of keeping the things dry, he had also built a sort of
platform just behind the prow, railed in with green wicker-work; and
here was a heap of yellow bananas and cowree shells; young cocoa-nuts
and antlers of red coral; two or three pieces of carved wood; a little
pocket-idol, black as jet, and rolls of printed tappa.

We were given a holiday; and upon going ashore, Poky, of course, was my
companion and guide. For this, no mortal could be better qualified; his
native country was not large, and he knew every inch of it. Gallanting
me about, everyone was stopped and ceremoniously introduced to Poky’s
“tayo karhowree nuee” or his particular white friend.

He showed me all the lions; but more than all, he took me to see a
charming lioness—a young damsel—the daughter of a chief—the reputation
of whose charms had spread to the neighbouring islands, and even
brought suitors therefrom. Among these was Tooboi, the heir of
Tamatory, King of Eaiatair, one of the Society Isles. The girl was
certainly fair to look upon. Many heavens were in her sunny eyes; and
the outline of that arm of hers, peeping forth from a capricious tappa
robe, was the very curve of beauty.

Though there was no end to Poky’s attentions, not a syllable did he
ever breathe of reward; but sometimes he looked very knowing. At last
the day came for sailing, and with it, also, his canoe, loaded down to
the gunwale with a sea stock of fruits. Giving him all I could spare
from my chest, I went on deck to take my place at the windlass; for the
anchor was weighing. Poky followed, and heaved with me at the same
handspike.

The anchor was soon up; and away we went out of the bay with more than
twenty shallops towing astern. At last they left us; but long as I
could see him at all, there was Poky, standing alone and motionless in
the bow of his canoe.




PART II




CHAPTER XL.
WE TAKE UNTO OURSELVES FRIENDS


The arrival of the chests made my friend, the doctor, by far the
wealthiest man of the party. So much the better for me, seeing that I
had little or nothing myself; though, from our intimacy, the natives
courted my favour almost as much as his.

Among others, Kooloo was a candidate for my friendship; and being a
comely youth, quite a buck in his way, I accepted his overtures. By
this, I escaped the importunities of the rest; for be it known that,
though little inclined to jealousy in love matters, the Tahitian will
hear of no rivals in his friendship.

Kooloo, running over his qualifications as a friend, first of all
informed me that he was a “Mickonaree,” thus declaring his communion
with the church.

The way this “tayo” of mine expressed his regard was by assuring me
over and over again that the love he bore me was “nuee, nuee, nuee,” or
infinitesimally extensive. All over these seas, the word “nuee” is
significant of quantity. Its repetition is like placing ciphers at the
right hand of a numeral; the more places you carry it out to, the
greater the sum. Judge, then, of Kooloo’s esteem. Nor is the allusion
to the ciphers at all inappropriate, seeing that, in themselves,
Kooloo’s profession turned out to be worthless. He was, alas! as
sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal; one of those who make no music
unless the clapper be silver.

In the course of a few days, the sailors, like the doctor and myself,
were cajoled out of everything, and our “tayos,” all round, began to
cool off quite sensibly. So remiss did they become in their attentions
that we could no longer rely upon their bringing us the daily supply of
food, which all of them had faithfully promised.

As for Kooloo, after sponging me well, he one morning played the part
of a retrograde lover; informing me that his affections had undergone a
change; he had fallen in love at first sight with a smart sailor, who
had just stepped ashore quite flush from a lucky whaling-cruise.

It was a touching interview, and with it, our connection dissolved. But
the sadness which ensued would soon have been dissipated, had not my
sensibilities been wounded by his indelicately sporting some of my
gifts very soon after this transfer of his affections. Hardly a day
passed that I did not meet him on the Broom Road, airing himself in a
regatta shirt which I had given him in happier hours.

He went by with such an easy saunter too, looking me pleasantly in the
eye, and merely exchanging the cold salute of the road:—“Yar onor,
boyoee,” a mere sidewalk how d’ye do. After several experiences like
this, I began to entertain a sort of respect for Kooloo, as quite a man
of the world. In good sooth, he turned out to be one; in one week’s
time giving me the cut direct, and lounging by without even nodding. He
must have taken me for part of the landscape.

Before the chests were quite empty, we had a grand washing in the
stream of our best raiment, for the purpose of looking tidy, and
visiting the European chapel in the village. Every Sunday morning it is
open for divine service, some member of the mission officiating. This
was the first time we ever entered Papeetee unattended by an escort.

In the chapel there were about forty people present, including the
officers of several ships in harbour. It was an energetic discourse,
and the pulpit cushion was well pounded. Occupying a high seat in the
synagogue, and stiff as a flagstaff, was our beloved guardian, Wilson.
I shall never forget his look of wonder when his interesting wards
filed in at the doorway, and took up a seat directly facing him.

Service over, we waited outside in hopes of seeing more of him; but
sorely annoyed at the sight of us, he reconnoitred from the window, and
never came forth until we had started for home.




CHAPTER XLI.
WE LEVY CONTRIBUTIONS ON THE SHIPPING


Scarcely a week went by after the Julia’s sailing, when, with the
proverbial restlessness of sailors, some of the men began to grow weary
of the Calabooza Beretanee, and resolved to go boldly among the vessels
in the bay, and offer to ship.

The thing was tried; but though strongly recommended by the commodore
of the beachcombers, in the end they were invariably told by the
captains to whom they applied that they bore an equivocal character
ashore, and would not answer. So often were they repulsed that we
pretty nearly gave up all thoughts of leaving the island in this way;
and growing domestic again, settled down quietly at Captain Bob’s.

It was about this time that the whaling-ships, which have their regular
seasons for cruising, began to arrive at Papeetee; and of course their
crews frequently visited us. This is customary all over the Pacific. No
sailor steps ashore, but he straightway goes to the “Calabooza,” where
he is almost sure to find some poor fellow or other in confinement for
desertion, or alleged mutiny, or something of that sort. Sympathy is
proffered, and if need be, tobacco. The latter, however, is most in
request; as a solace to the captive, it is invaluable.

Having fairly carried the day against both consul and captain, we were
objects of even more than ordinary interest to these philanthropists;
and they always cordially applauded our conduct. Besides, they
invariably brought along something in the way of refreshments;
occasionally smuggling in a little Pisco. Upon one occasion, when there
was quite a number present, a calabash was passed round, and a
pecuniary collection taken up for our benefit.

One day a newcomer proposed that two or three of us should pay him a
sly, nocturnal visit aboard his ship; engaging to send us away well
freighted with provisions. This was not a bad idea; nor were we at all
backward in acting upon it. Right after night every vessel in the
harbour was visited in rotation, the foragers borrowing Captain Bob’s
canoe for the purpose. As we all took turns at this—two by two—in due
course it came to Long Ghost and myself, for the sailors invariably
linked us together. In such an enterprise, I somewhat distrusted the
doctor, for he was no sailor, and very tall; and a canoe is the most
ticklish of navigable things. However, it could not be helped; and so
we went.

But a word about the canoes before we go any further. Among the Society
Islands, the art of building them, like all native accomplishments, has
greatly deteriorated; and they are now the most inelegant, as well as
the most insecure of any in the South Seas. In Cook’s time, according
to his account, there was at Tahiti a royal fleet of seventeen hundred
and twenty large war canoes, handsomely carved, and otherwise adorned.
At present, those used are quite small; nothing more than logs hollowed
out, sharpened at one end, and then launched into the water.

To obviate a certain rolling propensity, the Tahitians, like all
Polynesians, attach to them what sailors call an “outrigger.” It
consists of a pole floating alongside, parallel to the canoe, and
connected with it by a couple of cross sticks, a yard or more in
length. Thus equipped, the canoe cannot be overturned, unless you
overcome the buoyancy of the pole, or lift it entirely out of the
water.

Now, Captain Bob’s “gig” was exceedingly small; so small, and of such a
grotesque shape, that the sailors christened it the Pill Box; and by
this appellation it always went. In fact, it was a sort of “sulky,”
meant for a solitary paddler, but, on an emergency, capable of floating
two or three. The outrigger was a mere switch, alternately rising in
air, and then depressed in the water.

Assuming the command of the expedition, upon the strength of my being a
sailor, I packed the Long Doctor with a paddle in the bow, and then
shoving off, leaped into the stern; thus leaving him to do all the
work, and reserving to myself the dignified sinecure of steering. All
would have gone on well, were it not that my paddler made such clumsy
work that the water spattered, and showered down upon us without
ceasing. Continuing to ply his tool, however, quite energetically, I
thought he would improve after a while, and so let him alone. But by
and bye, getting wet through with this little storm we were raising,
and seeing no signs of its clearing off, I conjured him, in mercy’s
name, to stop short, and let me wring myself out. Upon this, he
suddenly turned round, when the canoe gave a roll, the outrigger flew
overhead, and the next moment came rap on the doctor’s skull, and we
were both in the water.

Fortunately, we were just over a ledge of coral, not half-a-fathom
under the surface. Depressing one end of the filled canoe, and letting
go of it quickly, it bounced up, and discharged a great part of its
contents; so that we easily baled out the remainder, and again
embarked. This time, my comrade coiled himself away in a very small
space; and enjoining upon him not to draw a single unnecessary breath,
I proceeded to urge the canoe along by myself. I was astonished at his
docility, never speaking a word, and stirring neither hand nor foot;
but the secret was, he was unable to swim, and in case we met with a
second mishap, there were no more ledges beneath to stand upon.
“Crowning’s but a shabby way of going out of the world,” he exclaimed,
upon my rallying him; “and I’m not going to be guilty of it.”

At last, the ship was at hand, and we approached with much caution,
wishing to avoid being hailed by anyone from the quarter-deck. Dropping
silently under her bows, we heard a low whistle—the signal agreed
upon—and presently a goodly-sized bag was lowered over to us.

We cut the line, and then paddled away as fast as we could, and made
the best of our way home. Here, we found the rest waiting impatiently.

The bag turned out to be well filled with sweet potatoes boiled, cubes
of salt beef and pork, and a famous sailors’ pudding, what they call
“duff,” made of flour and water, and of about the consistence of an
underdone brick. With these delicacies, and keen appetites, we went out
into the moonlight, and had a nocturnal picnic.




CHAPTER XLII.
MOTOO-OTOO A TAHITIAN CASUIST


The Pill Box was sometimes employed for other purposes than that
described in the last chapter. We sometimes went a-pleasuring in it.

Right in the middle of Papeetee harbour is a bright, green island, one
circular grove of waving palms, and scarcely a hundred yards across. It
is of coral formation; and all round, for many rods out, the bay is so
shallow that you might wade anywhere. Down in these waters, as
transparent as air, you see coral plants of every hue and shape
imaginable:—antlers, tufts of azure, waving reeds like stalks of grain,
and pale green buds and mosses. In some places, you look through
prickly branches down to a snow-white floor of sand, sprouting with
flinty bulbs; and crawling among these are strange shapes:—some
bristling with spikes, others clad in shining coats of mail, and here
and there, round forms all spangled with eyes.

The island is called Hotoo-Otoo; and around Hotoo-Otoo have I often
paddled of a white moonlight night, pausing now and then to admire the
marine gardens beneath.

The place is the private property of the queen, who has a residence
there—a melancholy-looking range of bamboo houses—neglected and falling
to decay among the trees.

Commanding the harbour as it does, her majesty has done all she could
to make a fortress of the island. The margin has been raised and
levelled, and built up with a low parapet of hewn Hocks of coral.
Behind the parapet are ranged, at wide intervals, a number of rusty old
cannon, of all fashions and calibres. They are mounted upon lame,
decrepit-looking carriages, ready to sink under the useless burden of
bearing them up. Indeed, two or three have given up the ghost
altogether, and the pieces they sustained lie half buried among their
bleaching bones. Several of the cannon are spiked; probably with a view
of making them more formidable; as they certainly must be to anyone
undertaking to fire them off.

Presented to Pomaree at various times by captains of British armed
ships, these poor old “dogs of war,” thus toothless and turned out to
die, formerly bayed in full pack as the battle-hounds of Old England.

There was something about Hotoo-Otoo that struck my fancy; and I
registered a vow to plant my foot upon its soil, notwithstanding an old
bareheaded sentry menaced me in the moonlight with an unsightly musket.
As my canoe drew scarcely three inches of water, I could paddle close
up to the parapet without grounding; but every time I came near, the
old man ran toward me, pushing his piece forward, but never clapping it
to his shoulder. Thinking he only meant to frighten me, I at last
dashed the canoe right up to the wall, purposing a leap. It was the
rashest act of my life; for never did cocoa-nut come nearer getting
demolished than mine did then. With the stock of his gun, the old
warder fetched a tremendous blow, which I managed to dodge; and then
falling back, succeeded in paddling out of harm’s reach.

He must have been dumb; for never a word did he utter; but grinning
from ear to ear, and with his white cotton robe streaming in the
moonlight, he looked more like the spook of the island than anything
mortal.

I tried to effect my object by attacking him in the rear—but he was all
front; running about the place as I paddled, and presenting his
confounded musket wherever I went. At last I was obliged to retreat;
and to this day my vow remains unfulfilled.

It was a few days after my repulse from before the walls of Hotoo-Otoo
that I heard a curious case of casuistry argued between one of the most
clever and intelligent natives I ever saw in Tahiti, a man by the name
of Arheetoo, and our learned Theban of a doctor.

It was this:—whether it was right and lawful for anyone, being a
native, to keep the European Sabbath, in preference to the day set
apart as such by the missionaries, and so considered by the islanders
in general.

It must be known that the missionaries of the good ship Duff, who more
than half-a-century ago established the Tahitian reckoning, came hither
by the way of the Cape of Good Hope; and by thus sailing to the
eastward, lost one precious day of their lives all round, getting about
that much in advance of Greenwich time. For this reason, vessels coming
round Cape Horn—as they most all do nowadays—find it Sunday in Tahiti,
when, according to their own view of the matter, it ought to be
Saturday. But as it won’t do to alter the log, the sailors keep their
Sabbath, and the islanders theirs.

This confusion perplexes the poor natives mightily; and it is to no
purpose that you endeavour to explain so incomprehensible a phenomenon.
I once saw a worthy old missionary essay to shed some light on the
subject; and though I understood but a few of the words employed, I
could easily get at the meaning of his illustrations. They were
something like the following:

“Here,” says he, “you see this circle” (describing a large one on the
ground with a stick); “very good; now you see this spot here” (marking
a point in the perimeter): “well; this is Beretanee (England), and I’m
going to sail round to Tahiti. Here I go, then (following the circle
round), and there goes the sun (snatching up another stick, and
commissioning a bandy-legged native to travel round with it in a
contrary direction). Now then, we are both off, and both going away
from each other; and here you see I have arrived at Tahiti (making a
sudden stop); and look now where Bandy Legs is!”

But the crowd strenuously maintained that Bandy Legs ought to be
somewhere above them in the atmosphere; for it was a traditionary fact
that the people from the Duff came ashore when the sun was high
overhead. And here the old gentleman, being a very good sort of man,
doubtless, but no astronomer, was obliged to give up.

Arheetoo, the casuist alluded to, though a member of the church, and
extremely conscientious about what Sabbath he kept, was more liberal in
other matters. Learning that I was something of a “mick-onaree” (in
this sense, a man able to read, and cunning in the use of the pen), he
desired the slight favour of my forging for him a set of papers; for
which, he said, he would be much obliged, and give me a good dinner of
roast pig and Indian turnip in the bargain.

Now, Arheetoo was one of those who board the shipping for their
washing; and the competition being very great (the proudest chiefs not
disdaining to solicit custom in person, though the work is done by
their dependants), he had decided upon a course suggested by a knowing
sailor, a friend of his. He wished to have manufactured a set of
certificates, purporting to come from certain man-of-war and merchant
captains, known to have visited the island; recommending him as one of
the best getters up of fine linen in all Polynesia.

At this time, Arheetoo had known me but two hours; and, as he made the
proposition very coolly, I thought it rather presumptuous, and told him
so. But as it was quite impossible to convey a hint, and there was a
slight impropriety in the thing, I did not resent the insult, but
simply declined.




CHAPTER XLIII.
ONE IS JUDGED BY THE COMPANY HE KEEPS


Altough, from its novelty, life at Captain Bob’s was pleasant enough,
for the time; there were some few annoyances connected with it anything
but agreeable to a “soul of sensibility.”

Prejudiced against us by the malevolent representations of the consul
and others, many worthy foreigners ashore regarded us as a set of
lawless vagabonds; though, truth to speak, better behaved sailors never
stepped on the island, nor any who gave less trouble to the natives.
But, for all this, whenever we met a respectably-dressed European, ten
to one he shunned us by going over to the other side of the road. This
was very unpleasant, at least to myself; though, certes, it did not
prey upon the minds of the others.

To give an instance.

Of a fine evening in Tahiti—but they are all fine evenings there—you
may see a bevy of silk bonnets and parasols passing along the Broom
Road: perhaps a band of pale, little white urchins—sickly exotics—and,
oftener still, sedate, elderly gentlemen, with canes; at whose
appearance the natives, here and there, slink into their huts. These
are the missionaries, their wives, and children, taking a family
airing. Sometimes, by the bye, they take horse, and ride down to Point
Venus and back; a distance of several miles. At this place is settled
the only survivor of the first missionaries that landed—an old,
white-headed, saint-like man, by the name of Wilson, the father of our
friend, the consul.

The little parties on foot were frequently encountered; and, recalling,
as they did, so many pleasant recollections of home and the ladies, I
really longed for a dress coat and beaver that I might step up and pay
my respects. But, situated as I was, this was out of the question. On
one occasion, however, I received a kind, inquisitive glance from a
matron in gingham. Sweet lady! I have not forgotten her: her gown was a
plaid.

But a glance, like hers, was not always bestowed.

One evening, passing the verandah of a missionary’s dwelling, the dame,
his wife, and a pretty, blonde young girl, with ringlets, were sitting
there, enjoying the sea-breeze, then coming in, all cool and
refreshing, from the spray of the reef. As I approached, the old lady
peered hard at me; and her very cap seemed to convey a prim rebuke. The
blue, English eyes, by her side, were also bent on me. But, oh Heavens!
what a glance to receive from such a beautiful creature! As for the mob
cap, not a fig did I care for it; but, to be taken for anything but a
cavalier, by the ringleted one, was absolutely unendurable.

I resolved on a courteous salute, to show my good-breeding, if nothing
more. But, happening to wear a sort of turban—hereafter to be
particularly alluded to—there was no taking it off and putting it on
again with anything like dignity. At any rate, then, here goes a how.
But, another difficulty presented itself; my loose frock was so
voluminous that I doubted whether any spinal curvature would be
perceptible.

“Good evening, ladies,” exclaimed I, at last, advancing winningly; “a
delightful air from the sea, ladies.”

Hysterics and hartshorn! who would have thought it? The young lady
screamed, and the old one came near fainting. As for myself, I
retreated in double-quick time; and scarcely drew breath until safely
housed in the Calabooza.




CHAPTER XLIV.
CATHEDRAL OF PAPOAR—THE CHURCH OF THE COCOA-NUTS


On Sundays I always attended the principal native church, on the
outskirts of the village of Papeetee, and not far from the Calabooza
Beretanee. It was esteemed the best specimen of architecture in Tahiti.

Of late, they have built their places of worship with more reference to
durability than formerly. At one time, there were no less than
thirty-six on the island—mere barns, tied together with thongs, which
went to destruction in a very few years.

One, built many years ago in this style, was a most remarkable
structure. It was erected by Pomaree II., who, on this occasion, showed
all the zeal of a royal proselyte. The building was over seven hundred
feet in length, and of a proportionate width; the vast ridge-pole was
at intervals supported by a row of thirty-six cylindrical trunks of the
bread-fruit tree; and, all round, the wall-plates rested on shafts of
the palm. The roof—steeply inclining to within a man’s height of the
ground—was thatched with leaves, and the sides of the edifice were
open. Thus spacious was the Royal Mission Chapel of Papoar.

At its dedication, three distinct sermons were, from different pulpits,
preached to an immense concourse gathered from all parts of the island.

As the chapel was built by the king’s command, nearly as great a
multitude was employed in its construction as swarmed over the
scaffolding of the great temple of the Jews. Much less time, however,
was expended. In less than three weeks from planting the first post,
the last tier of palmetto-leaves drooped from the eaves, and the work
was done.

Apportioned to the several chiefs and their dependants, the labour,
though immense, was greatly facilitated by everyone’s bringing his
post, or his rafter, or his pole strung with thatching, ready for
instant use. The materials thus prepared being afterwards secured
together by thongs, there was literally “neither hammer, nor axe, nor
any tool of iron heard in the house while it was building.”

But the most singular circumstance connected with this South Sea
cathedral remains to be related. As well for the beauty as the
advantages of such a site, the islanders love to dwell near the
mountain streams; and so, a considerable brook, after descending from
the hills and watering the valley, was bridged over in three places,
and swept clean through the chapel.

Flowing waters! what an accompaniment to the songs of the sanctuary;
mingling with them the praises and thanksgivings of the green solitudes
inland.

But the chapel of the Polynesian Solomon has long since been deserted.
Its thousand rafters of habiscus have decayed, and fallen to the
ground; and now, the stream murmurs over them in its bed.

The present metropolitan church of Tahiti is very unlike the one just
described. It is of moderate dimensions, boarded over, and painted
white. It is furnished also with blinds, but no sashes; indeed, were it
not for the rustic thatch, it would remind one of a plain chapel at
home.

The woodwork was all done by foreign carpenters, of whom there are
always several about Papeetee.

Within, its aspect is unique, and cannot fail to interest a stranger.
The rafters overhead are bound round with fine matting of variegated
dyes; and all along the ridge-pole these trappings hang pendent, in
alternate bunches of tassels and deep fringes of stained grass. The
floor is composed of rude planks. Regular aisles run between ranges of
native settees, bottomed with crossed braids of the cocoa-nut fibre,
and furnished with backs.

But the pulpit, made of a dark, lustrous wood, and standing at one end,
is by far the most striking object. It is preposterously lofty; indeed,
a capital bird’s-eye view of the congregation ought to be had from its
summit.

Nor does the church lack a gallery, which runs round on three sides,
and is supported by columns of the cocoa-nut tree.

Its facings are here and there daubed over with a tawdry blue; and in
other places (without the slightest regard to uniformity), patches of
the same colour may be seen. In their ardour to decorate the sanctuary,
the converts must have borrowed each a brush full of paint, and
zealously daubed away at the first surface that offered.

As hinted, the general impression is extremely curious. Little light
being admitted, and everything being of a dark colour, there is an
indefinable Indian aspect of duskiness throughout. A strange, woody
smell, also—more or less pervading every considerable edifice in
Polynesia—is at once perceptible. It suggests the idea of worm-eaten
idols packed away in some old lumber-room at hand.

For the most part, the congregation attending this church is composed
of the better and wealthier orders—the chiefs and their retainers; in
short, the rank and fashion of the island. This class is infinitely
superior in personal beauty and general healthfulness to the
“marenhoar,” or common people; the latter having been more exposed to
the worst and most debasing evils of foreign intercourse. On Sundays,
the former are invariably arrayed in their finery; and thus appear to
the best advantage. Nor are they driven to the chapel, as some of their
inferiors are to other places of worship; on the contrary, capable of
maintaining a handsome exterior, and possessing greater intelligence,
they go voluntarily.

In respect of the woodland colonnade supporting its galleries, I called
this chapel the Church of the Cocoa-nuts.

It was the first place for Christian worship in Polynesia that I had
seen; and the impression upon entering during service was all the
stronger. Majestic-looking chiefs whose fathers had hurled the
battle-club, and old men who had seen sacrifices smoking upon the
altars of Oro, were there. And hark! hanging from the bough of a
bread-fruit tree without, a bell is being struck with a bar of iron by
a native lad. In the same spot, the blast of the war-conch had often
resounded. But to the proceedings within.

The place is well filled. Everywhere meets the eye the gay calico
draperies worn on great occasions by the higher classes, and forming a
strange contrast of patterns and colours. In some instances, these are
so fashioned as to resemble as much as possible European garments. This
is in excessively bad taste. Coats and pantaloons, too, are here and
there seen; but they look awkwardly enough, and take away from the
general effect.

But it is the array of countenances that most strikes you. Each is
suffused with the peculiar animation of the Polynesians, when thus
collected in large numbers. Every robe is rustling, every limb in
motion, and an incessant buzzing going on throughout the assembly. The
tumult is so great that the voice of the placid old missionary, who now
rises, is almost inaudible. Some degree of silence is at length
obtained through the exertions of half-a-dozen strapping fellows, in
white shirts and no pantaloons. Running in among the settees, they are
at great pains to inculcate the impropriety of making a noise by
creating a most unnecessary racket themselves. This part of the service
was quite comical.

There is a most interesting Sabbath School connected with the church;
and the scholars, a vivacious, mischievous set, were in one part of the
gallery. I was amused by a party in a corner. The teacher sat at one
end of the bench, with a meek little fellow by his side. When the
others were disorderly, this young martyr received a rap; intended,
probably, as a sample of what the rest might expect, if they didn’t
amend.

Standing in the body of the church, and leaning against a pillar, was
an old man, in appearance very different from others of his countrymen.
He wore nothing but a coarse, scant mantle of faded tappa; and from his
staring, bewildered manner, I set him down as an aged bumpkin from the
interior, unaccustomed to the strange sights and sounds of the
metropolis. This old worthy was sharply reprimanded for standing up,
and thus intercepting the view of those behind; but not comprehending
exactly what was said to him, one of the white-liveried gentry made no
ceremony of grasping him by the shoulders, and fairly crushing him down
into a seat.

During all this, the old missionary in the pulpit—as well as his
associates beneath, never ventured to interfere—leaving everything to
native management. With South Sea islanders, assembled in any numbers,
there is no other way of getting along.




CHAPTER XLV.
MISSIONARY’S SERMON; WITH SOME REFLECTIONS


Some degree of order at length restored, the service was continued, by
singing. The choir was composed of twelve or fifteen ladies of the
mission, occupying a long bench to the left of the pulpit. Almost the
entire congregation joined in.

The first air fairly startled me; it was the brave tune of Old Hundred,
adapted to a Tahitian psalm. After the graceless scenes I had recently
passed through, this circumstance, with all its accessories, moved me
forcibly.

Many voices around were of great sweetness and compass. The singers,
also, seemed to enjoy themselves mightily; some of them pausing, now
and then, and looking round, as if to realize the scene more fully. In
truth, they sang right joyously, despite the solemnity of the tune.

The Tahitians have much natural talent for singing; and, on all
occasions, are exceedingly fond of it. I have often heard a stave or
two of psalmody, hummed over by rakish young fellows, like a snatch
from an opera.

With respect to singing, as in most other matters, the Tahitians widely
differ from the people of the Sandwich Islands; where the parochial
flocks may be said rather to Heat than sing.

The psalm concluded, a prayer followed. Very considerately, the good
old missionary made it short; for the congregation became fidgety and
inattentive as soon as it commenced.

A chapter of the Tahitian Bible was now read; a text selected; and the
sermon began. It was listened to with more attention than I had
anticipated.

Having been informed, from various sources, that the discourses of the
missionaries, being calculated to engage the attention of their simple
auditors, were, naturally enough, of a rather amusing description to
strangers; in short, that they had much to say about steamboats, lord
mayor’s coaches, and the way fires are put out in London, I had taken
care to provide myself with a good interpreter, in the person of an
intelligent Hawaiian sailor, whose acquaintance I had made.

“Now, Jack,” said I, before entering, “hear every word, and tell me
what you can as the missionary goes on.”

Jack’s was not, perhaps, a critical version of the discourse; and at
the time, I took no notes of what he said. Nevertheless, I will here
venture to give what I remember of it; and, as far as possible, in
Jack’s phraseology, so as to lose nothing by a double translation.

“Good friends, I glad to see you; and I very well like to have some
talk with you to-day. Good friends, very bad times in Tahiti; it make
me weep. Pomaree is gone—the island no more yours, but the Wee-wees’
(French). Wicked priests here, too; and wicked idols in woman’s
clothes, and brass chains.

“Good friends, no you speak, or look at them—but I know you won’t—they
belong to a set of robbers—the wicked Wee-wees. Soon these bad men be
made to go very quick. Beretanee ships of thunder come and away they
go. But no more ’bout this now. I speak more by by.

“Good friends, many whale-ships here now; and many bad men come in ’em.
No good sailors living—that you know very well. They come here, ’cause
so bad they no keep ’em home.

“My good little girls, no run after sailors—no go where they go; they
harm you. Where they come from, no good people talk to ’em—just like
dogs. Here, they talk to Pomaree, and drink arva with great Poofai.

“Good friends, this very small island, but very wicked, and very poor;
these two go together. Why Beretanee so great? Because that island good
island, and send mickonaree to poor kannaka In Beretanee, every man
rich: plenty things to buy; and plenty things to sell. Houses bigger
than Pomaree’s, and more grand. Everybody, too, ride about in coaches,
bigger than hers; and wear fine tappa every day. (Several luxurious
appliances of civilization were here enumerated, and described.)

“Good friends, little to eat left at my house. Schooner from Sydney no
bring bag of flour: and kannaka no bring pig and fruit enough.
Mickonaree do great deal for kannaka; kannaka do little for mickonaree.
So, good friends, weave plenty of cocoa-nut baskets, fill ’em, and
bring ’em to-morrow.”

Such was the substance of great part of this discourse; and, whatever
may be thought of it, it was specially adapted to the minds of the
islanders: who are susceptible to no impressions, except from things
palpable, or novel and striking. To them, a dry sermon would be dry
indeed.

The Tahitians can hardly ever be said to reflect: they are all impulse;
and so, instead of expounding dogmas, the missionaries give them the
large type, pleasing cuts, and short and easy lessons of the primer.
Hence, anything like a permanent religious impression is seldom or
never produced.

In fact, there is, perhaps, no race upon earth, less disposed, by
nature, to the monitions of Christianity, than the people of the South
Seas. And this assertion is made with full knowledge of what is called
the “Great Revival at the Sandwich Islands,” about the year 1836; when
several thousands were, in the course of a few weeks, admitted into the
bosom of the Church. But this result was brought about by no sober
moral convictions; as an almost instantaneous relapse into every kind
of licentiousness soon after testified. It was the legitimate effect of
a morbid feeling, engendered by the sense of severe physical wants,
preying upon minds excessively prone to superstition; and, by fanatical
preaching, inflamed into the belief that the gods of the missionaries
were taking vengeance upon the wickedness of the land.

It is a noteworthy fact that those very traits in the Tahitians, which
induced the London Missionary Society to regard them as the most
promising subjects for conversion, and which led, moreover, to the
selection of their island as the very first field for missionary
labour, eventually proved the most serious obstruction. An air of
softness in their manners, great apparent ingenuousness and docility,
at first misled; but these were the mere accompaniments of an
indolence, bodily and mental; a constitutional voluptuousness; and an
aversion to the least restraint; which, however fitted for the
luxurious state of nature, in the tropics, are the greatest possible
hindrances to the strict moralities of Christianity.

Added to all this is a quality inherent in Polynesians; and more akin
to hypocrisy than anything else. It leads them to assume the most
passionate interest in matters for which they really feel little or
none whatever; but in which, those whose power they dread, or whose
favour they court, they believe to be at all affected. Thus, in their
heathen state, the Sandwich Islanders actually knocked out their teeth,
tore their hair, and mangled their bodies with shells, to testify their
inconsolable grief at the demise of a high chief, or member of the
royal family. And yet, Vancouver relates that, on such an occasion,
upon which he happened to be present, those apparently the most
abandoned to their feelings, immediately assumed the utmost
light-heartedness on receiving the present of a penny whistle, or a
Dutch looking-glass. Similar instances, also, have come under my own
observation.

The following is an illustration of the trait alluded to, as
occasionally manifested among the converted Polynesians.

At one of the Society Islands—Baiatair, I believe—the natives, for
special reasons, desired to commend themselves particularly to the
favour of the missionaries. Accordingly, during divine service, many of
them behaved in a manner, otherwise unaccountable, and precisely
similar to their behaviour as heathens. They pretended to be wrought up
to madness by the preaching which they heard. They rolled their eyes;
foamed at the mouth; fell down in fits; and so were carried home. Yet,
strange to relate, all this was deemed the evidence of the power of the
Most High; and, as such, was heralded abroad.

But, to return to the Church of the Cocoa-nuts. The blessing
pronounced, the congregation disperse; enlivening the Broom Road with
their waving mantles. On either hand, they disappear down the shaded
pathways, which lead off from the main route, conducting to hamlets in
the groves, or to the little marine villas upon the beach. There is
considerable hilarity; and you would suppose them just from an
old-fashioned “hevar,” or jolly heathen dance. Those who carry Bibles
swing them carelessly from their arms by cords of sinnate.

The Sabbath is no ordinary day with the Tahitians. So far as doing any
work is concerned, it is scrupulously observed. The canoes are hauled
up on the beach; the nets are spread to dry. Passing by the hen-coop
huts on the roadside, you find their occupants idle, as usual; but less
disposed to gossip. After service, repose broods over the whole island;
the valleys reaching inland look stiller than ever.

In short, it is Sunday—their “Taboo Day”; the very word formerly
expressing the sacredness of their pagan observances now proclaiming
the sanctity of the Christian Sabbath.




CHAPTER XLVI.
SOMETHING ABOUT THE KANNAKIPPERS


A worthy young man, formerly a friend of mine (I speak of Kooloo with
all possible courtesy, since after our intimacy there would be an
impropriety in doing otherwise)—this worthy youth, having some genteel
notions of retirement, dwelt in a “maroo boro,” or bread-fruit shade, a
pretty nook in a wood, midway between the Calabooza Beretanee and the
Church of Cocoa-nuts. Hence, at the latter place, he was one of the
most regular worshippers.

Kooloo was a blade. Standing up in the congregation in all the bravery
of a striped calico shirt, with the skirts rakishly adjusted over a
pair of white sailor trousers, and hair well anointed with cocoa-nut
oil, he ogled the ladies with an air of supreme satisfaction. Nor were
his glances unreturned.

But such looks as the Tahitian belles cast at each other: frequently
turning up their noses at the advent of a new cotton mantle recently
imported in the chest of some amorous sailor. Upon one occasion, I
observed a group of young girls, in tunics of course, soiled sheeting,
disdainfully pointing at a damsel in a flaming red one. “Oee tootai
owree!” said they with ineffable scorn, “itai maitai!” (You are a
good-for-nothing huzzy, no better than you should be).

Now, Kooloo communed with the church; so did all these censorious young
ladies. Yet after eating bread-fruit at the Eucharist, I knew several
of them, the same night, to be guilty of some sad derelictions.

Puzzled by these things, I resolved to find out, if possible, what
ideas, if any, they entertained of religion; but as one’s spiritual
concerns are rather delicate for a stranger to meddle with, I went to
work as adroitly as I could.

Farnow, an old native who had recently retired from active pursuits,
having thrown up the business of being a sort of running footman to the
queen, had settled down in a snug little retreat, not fifty rods from
Captain Bob’s. His selecting our vicinity for his residence may have
been with some view to the advantages it afforded for introducing his
three daughters into polite circles. At any rate, not averse to
receiving the attentions of so devoted a gallant as the doctor, the
sisters (communicants, be it remembered) kindly extended to him free
permission to visit them sociably whenever he pleased.

We dropped in one evening, and found the ladies at home. My long friend
engaged his favourites, the two younger girls, at the game of “Now,” or
hunting a stone under three piles of tappa. For myself, I lounged on a
mat with Ideea the eldest, dallying with her grass fan, and improving
my knowledge of Tahitian.

The occasion was well adapted to my purpose, and I began.

“Ah, Ideea, mickonaree oee?” the same as drawling out—“By the bye, Miss
Ideea, do you belong to the church?”

“Yes, me mickonaree,” was the reply.

But the assertion was at once qualified by certain, reservations; so
curious that I cannot forbear their relation.

“Mickonaree ena” (church member here), exclaimed she, laying her hand
upon her mouth, and a strong emphasis on the adverb. In the same way,
and with similar exclamations, she touched her eyes and hands. This
done, her whole air changed in an instant; and she gave me to
understand, by unmistakable gestures, that in certain other respects
she was not exactly a “mickonaree.” In short, Ideea was

“A sad good Christian at the heart—A very heathen in the carnal part.”

The explanation terminated in a burst of laughter, in which all three
sisters joined; and for fear of looking silly, the doctor and myself.
As soon as good-breeding would permit, we took leave.

The hypocrisy in matters of religion, so apparent in all Polynesian
converts, is most injudiciously nourished in Tahiti by a zealous and in
many cases, a coercive superintendence over their spiritual well-being.
But it is only manifested with respect to the common people, their
superiors being exempted.

On Sunday mornings, when the prospect is rather small for a full house
in the minor churches, a parcel of fellows are actually sent out with
ratans into the highways and byways as whippers-in of the congregation.
This is a sober fact.

These worthies constitute a religious police; and you always know them
by the great white diapers they wear. On week days they are quite as
busy as on Sundays; to the great terror of the inhabitants, going all
over the island, and spying out the wickedness thereof.

Moreover, they are the collectors of fines—levied generally in grass
mats—for obstinate non-attendance upon divine worship, and other
offences amenable to the ecclesiastical judicature of the missionaries.

Old Bob called these fellows “kannakippers” a corruption, I fancy, of
our word constable.

He bore them a bitter grudge; and one day, drawing near home, and
learning that two of them were just then making a domiciliary visit at
his house, he ran behind a bush; and as they came forth, two green
bread-fruit from a hand unseen took them each between the shoulders.
The sailors in the Calabooza were witnesses to this, as well as several
natives; who, when the intruders were out of sight, applauded Captain
Bob’s spirit in no measured terms; the ladies present vehemently
joining in. Indeed, the kannakippers have no greater enemies than the
latter. And no wonder: the impertinent varlets, popping into their
houses at all hours, are forever prying into their peccadilloes.

Kooloo, who at times was patriotic and pensive, and mourned the evils
under which his country was groaning, frequently inveighed against the
statute which thus authorized an utter stranger to interfere with
domestic arrangements. He himself—quite a ladies’ man—had often been
annoyed thereby. He considered the kannakippers a bore.

Beside their confounded inquisitiveness, they add insult to injury, by
making a point of dining out every day at some hut within the limits of
their jurisdiction. As for the gentleman of the house, his meek
endurance of these things is amazing. But “good easy man,” there is
nothing for him but to be as hospitable as possible.

These gentry are indefatigable. At the dead of night prowling round the
houses, and in the daytime hunting amorous couples in the groves. Yet
in one instance the chase completely baffled them.

It was thus.

Several weeks previous to our arrival at the island, someone’s husband
and another person’s wife, having taken a mutual fancy for each other,
went out for a walk. The alarm was raised, and with hue and cry they
were pursued; but nothing was seen of them again until the lapse of
some ninety days; when we were called out from the Calabooza to behold
a great mob inclosing the lovers, and escorting them for trial to the
village.

Their appearance was most singular. The girdle excepted, they were
quite naked; their hair was long, burned yellow at the ends, and
entangled with burrs; and their bodies scratched and scarred in all
directions. It seems that, acting upon the “love in a cottage”
principle, they had gone right into the interior; and throwing up a hut
in an uninhabited valley, had lived there, until in an unlucky stroll
they were observed and captured.

They were subsequently condemned to make one hundred fathoms of Broom
Road—a six months’ work, if not more.

Often, when seated in a house, conversing quietly with its inmates, I
have known them betray the greatest confusion at the sudden
announcement of a kannakipper’s being in sight. To be reported by one
of these officials as a “Tootai Owree” (in general, signifying a bad
person or disbeliever in Christianity), is as much dreaded as the
forefinger of Titus Gates was, levelled at an alleged papist.

But the islanders take a sly revenge upon them. Upon entering a
dwelling, the kannakippers oftentimes volunteer a pharisaical
prayer-meeting: hence, they go in secret by the name of “Boora-Artuas,”
literally, “Pray-to-Gods.”




CHAPTER XLVII.
HOW THEY DRESS IN TAHITI


Except where the employment of making “tappa” is inflicted as a
punishment, the echoes of the cloth-mallet have long since died away in
the listless valleys of Tahiti. Formerly, the girls spent their
mornings like ladies at their tambour frames; now, they are lounged
away in almost utter indolence. True, most of them make their own
garments; but this comprises but a stitch or two; the ladies of the
mission, by the bye, being entitled to the credit of teaching them to
sew.

The “kihee whihenee,” or petticoat, is a mere breadth of white cotton,
or calico; loosely enveloping the person, from the waist to the feet.
Fastened simply by a single tuck, or by twisting the upper corners
together, this garment frequently becomes disordered; thus affording an
opportunity of being coquettishly adjusted. Over the “kihee,” they wear
a sort of gown, open in front, very loose, and as negligent as you
please. The ladies here never dress for dinner.

But what shall be said of those horrid hats! Fancy a bunch of straw,
plaited into the shape of a coal-scuttle, and stuck, bolt upright, on
the crown; with a yard or two of red ribbon flying about like
kite-strings. Milliners of Paris, what would ye say to them! Though
made by the natives, they are said to have been first contrived and
recommended by the missionaries’ wives; a report which, I really trust,
is nothing but scandal.

Curious to relate, these things for the head are esteemed exceedingly
becoming. The braiding of the straw is one of the few employments of
the higher classes; all of which but minister to the silliest vanity.

The young girls, however, wholly eschew the hats; leaving those dowdy
old souls, their mothers, to make frights of themselves.

As for the men, those who aspire to European garments seem to have no
perception of the relation subsisting between the various parts of a
gentleman’s costume. To the wearer of a coat, for instance, pantaloons
are by no means indispensable; and a bell-crowned hat and a girdle are
full dress. The young sailor, for whom Kooloo deserted me, presented
him with a shaggy old pea-jacket; and with this buttoned up to his
chin, under a tropical sun, he promenaded the Broom Road, quite elated.
Doctor Long Ghost, who saw him thus, ran away with the idea that he was
under medical treatment at the time—in the act of taking, what the
quacks call, a “sweat.”

A bachelor friend of Captain Bob rejoiced in the possession of a full
European suit; in which he often stormed the ladies’ hearts. Having a
military leaning, he ornamented the coat with a great scarlet patch on
the breast; and mounted it also, here and there, with several
regimental buttons, slyly cut from the uniform of a parcel of drunken
marines sent ashore on a holiday from a man-of-war. But, in spite of
the ornaments, the dress was not exactly the thing. From the tightness
of the cloth across the shoulders, his elbows projected from his sides,
like an ungainly rider’s; and his ponderous legs were jammed so hard
into his slim, nether garments that the threads of every seam showed;
and, at every step, you looked for a catastrophe.

In general, there seems to be no settled style of dressing among the
males; they wear anything they can get; in some cases, awkwardly
modifying the fashions of their fathers so as to accord with their own
altered views of what is becoming.

But ridiculous as many of them now appear, in foreign habiliments, the
Tahitians presented a far different appearance in the original national
costume; which was graceful in the extreme, modest to all but the
prudish, and peculiarly adapted to the climate. But the short kilts of
dyed tappa, the tasselled maroes, and other articles formerly worn,
are, at the present day, prohibited by law as indecorous. For what
reason necklaces and garlands of flowers, among the women, are also
forbidden, I never could learn; but, it is said, that they were
associated, in some way, with a forgotten heathen observance.

Many pleasant, and, seemingly, innocent sports and pastimes, are
likewise interdicted. In old times, there were several athletic games
practised, such as wrestling, foot-racing, throwing the javelin, and
archery. In all these they greatly excelled; and, for some, splendid
festivals were instituted. Among their everyday amusements were
dancing, tossing the football, kite-flying, flute-playing, and singing
traditional ballads; now, all punishable offences; though most of them
have been so long in disuse that they are nearly forgotten.

In the same way, the “Opio,” or festive harvest-home of the breadfruit,
has been suppressed; though, as described to me by Captain Bob, it
seemed wholly free from any immoral tendency. Against tattooing, of any
kind, there is a severe law.

That this abolition of their national amusements and customs was not
willingly acquiesced in, is shown in the frequent violation of many of
the statutes inhibiting them; and, especially, in the frequency with
which their “hevars,” or dances, are practised in secret.

Doubtless, in thus denationalizing the Tahitians, as it were, the
missionaries were prompted by a sincere desire for good; but the effect
has been lamentable. Supplied with no amusements in place of those
forbidden, the Tahitians, who require more recreation than other
people, have sunk into a listlessness, or indulge in sensualities, a
hundred times more pernicious than all the games ever celebrated in the
Temple of Tanee.




CHAPTER XLVIII.
TAHITI AS IT IS


As in the last few chapters, several matters connected with the general
condition of the natives have been incidentally touched upon, it may be
well not to leave so important a subject in a state calculated to
convey erroneous impressions. Let us bestow upon it, therefore,
something more than a mere cursory glance.

But in the first place, let it be distinctly understood that, in all I
have to say upon this subject, both here and elsewhere, I mean no harm
to the missionaries nor their cause; I merely desire to set forth
things as they actually exist.

Of the results which have flowed from the intercourse of foreigners
with the Polynesians, including the attempts to civilize and
Christianize them by the missionaries, Tahiti, on many accounts, is
obviously the fairest practical example. Indeed, it may now be asserted
that the experiment of Christianizing the Tahitians, and improving
their social condition by the introduction of foreign customs, has been
fully tried. The present generation have grown up under the auspices of
their religious instructors. And although it may be urged that the
labours of the latter have at times been more or less obstructed by
unprincipled foreigners, still, this in no wise renders Tahiti any the
less a fair illustration; for, with obstacles like these, the
missionaries in Polynesia must always, and everywhere struggle.

Nearly sixty years have elapsed since the Tahitian mission was started;
and, during this period, it has received the unceasing prayers and
contributions of its friends abroad. Nor has any enterprise of the kind
called forth more devotion on the part of those directly employed in
it.

It matters not that the earlier labourers in the work, although
strictly conscientious, were, as a class, ignorant, and, in many cases,
deplorably bigoted: such traits have, in some degree, characterized the
pioneers of all faiths. And although in zeal and disinterestedness the
missionaries now on the island are, perhaps, inferior to their
predecessors, they have, nevertheless, in their own way at least,
laboured hard to make a Christian people of their charge.

Let us now glance at the most obvious changes wrought in their
condition.

The entire system of idolatry has been done away; together with several
barbarous practices engrafted thereon. But this result is not so much
to be ascribed to the missionaries, as to the civilizing effects of a
long and constant intercourse with whites of all nations; to whom, for
many years, Tahiti has been one of the principal places of resort in
the South Seas. At the Sandwich Islands, the potent institution of the
Taboo, together with the entire paganism of the land, was utterly
abolished by a voluntary act of the natives some time previous to the
arrival of the first missionaries among them.

The next most striking change in the Tahitians is this. From the
permanent residence among them of influential and respectable
foreigners, as well as from the frequent visits of ships-of-war,
recognizing the nationality of the island, its inhabitants are no
longer deemed fit subjects for the atrocities practised upon mere
savages; and hence, secure from retaliation, vessels of all kinds now
enter their harbours with perfect safety.

But let us consider what results are directly ascribable to the
missionaries alone.

In all cases, they have striven hard to mitigate the evils resulting
from the commerce with the whites in general. Such attempts, however,
have been rather injudicious, and often ineffectual: in truth, a
barrier almost insurmountable is presented in the dispositions of the
people themselves. Still, in this respect, the morality of the
islanders is, upon the whole, improved by the presence of the
missionaries.

But the greatest achievement of the latter, and one which in itself is
most hopeful and gratifying, is that they have translated the entire
Bible into the language of the island; and I have myself known several
who were able to read it with facility. They have also established
churches, and schools for both children and adults; the latter, I
regret to say, are now much neglected: which must be ascribed, in a
great measure, to the disorders growing out of the proceedings of the
French.

It were unnecessary here to enter diffusely into matters connected with
the internal government of the Tahitian churches and schools. Nor, upon
this head, is my information copious enough to warrant me in presenting
details. But we do not need them. We are merely considering general
results, as made apparent in the moral and religious condition of the
island at large.

Upon a subject like this, however, it would be altogether too assuming
for a single individual to decide; and so, in place of my own random
observations, which may be found elsewhere, I will here present those
of several known authors, made under various circumstances, at
different periods, and down to a comparative late date. A few very
brief extracts will enable the reader to mark for himself what
progressive improvement, if any, has taken place.

Nor must it be overlooked that, of these authorities, the two first in
order are largely quoted by the Right Reverend M. Kussell, in a work
composed for the express purpose of imparting information on the
subject of Christian missions in Polynesia. And he frankly
acknowledges, moreover, that they are such as “cannot fail to have
great weight with the public.”

After alluding to the manifold evils entailed upon the natives by
foreigners, and their singularly inert condition; and after somewhat
too severely denouncing the undeniable errors of the mission, Kotzebue,
the Russian navigator, says, “A religion like this, which forbids every
innocent pleasure, and cramps or annihilates every mental power, is a
libel on the divine founder of Christianity. It is true that the
religion of the missionaries has, with a great deal of evil, effected
some good. It has restrained the vices of theft and incontinence; but
it has given birth to ignorance, hypocrisy, and a hatred of all other
modes of faith, which was once foreign to the open and benevolent
character of the Tahitian.”

Captain Beechy says that, while at Tahiti, he saw scenes “which must
have convinced the great sceptic of the thoroughly immoral condition of
the people, and which would force him to conclude, as Turnbull did,
many years previous, that their intercourse with the Europeans had
tended to debase, rather than exalt their condition.”

About the year 1834, Daniel Wheeler, an honest-hearted Quaker, prompted
by motives of the purest philanthropy, visited, in a vessel of his own,
most of the missionary settlements in the South Seas. He remained some
time at Tahiti; receiving the hospitalities of the missionaries there,
and, from time to time, exhorting the natives.

After bewailing their social condition, he frankly says of their
religious state, “Certainly, appearances are unpromising; and however
unwilling to adopt such a conclusion, there is reason to apprehend that
Christian principle is a great rarity.”

Such, then, is the testimony of good and unbiassed men, who have been
upon the spot; but, how comes it to differ so widely from impressions
of others at home? Simply thus: instead of estimating the result of
missionary labours by the number of heathens who have actually been
made to understand and practise (in some measure at least) the precepts
of Christianity, this result has been unwarrantably inferred from the
number of those who, without any understanding of these things, have in
any way been induced to abandon idolatry and conform to certain outward
observances.

By authority of some kind or other, exerted upon the natives through
their chiefs, and prompted by the hope of some worldly benefit to the
latter, and not by appeals to the reason, have conversions in Polynesia
been in most cases brought about.

Even in one or two instances—so often held up as wonderful examples of
divine power—where the natives have impulsively burned their idols, and
rushed to the waters of baptism, the very suddenness of the change has
but indicated its unsoundness. Williams, the martyr of Erromanga,
relates an instance where the inhabitants of an island professing
Christianity voluntarily assembled, and solemnly revived all their
heathen customs.

All the world over, facts are more eloquent than words; the following
will show in what estimation the missionaries themselves hold the
present state of Christianity and morals among the converted
Polynesians.

On the island of Imeeo (attached to the Tahitian mission) is a seminary
under the charge of the Rev. Mr. Simpson and wife, for the education of
the children of the missionaries, exclusively. Sent home—in many cases,
at a very early age—to finish their education, the pupils here are
taught nothing but the rudiments of knowledge; nothing more than may be
learned in the native schools. Notwithstanding this, the two races are
kept as far as possible from associating; the avowed reason being to
preserve the young whites from moral contamination. The better to
insure this end, every effort is made to prevent them from acquiring
the native language.

They went even further at the Sandwich Islands; where, a few years ago,
a playground for the children of the missionaries was inclosed with a
fence many feet high, the more effectually to exclude the wicked little
Hawaiians.

And yet, strange as it may seem, the depravity among the Polynesians,
which renders precautions like these necessary, was in a measure
unknown before their intercourse with the whites. The excellent Captain
Wilson, who took the first missionaries out to Tahiti, affirms that the
people of that island had, in many things, “more refined ideas of
decency than ourselves.” Vancouver, also, has some noteworthy ideas on
this subject, respecting the Sandwich Islanders.

That the immorality alluded to is continually increasing is plainly
shown in the numerous, severe, and perpetually violated laws against
licentiousness of all kinds in both groups of islands.

It is hardly to be expected that the missionaries would send home
accounts of this state of things. Hence, Captain Beechy, in alluding to
the “Polynesian Researches” of Ellis, says that the author has
impressed his readers with a far more elevated idea of the moral
condition of the Tahitians, and the degree of civilization to which
they have attained, than they deserve; or, at least, than the facts
which came under his observation authorized. He then goes on to say
that, in his intercourse with the islanders, “they had no fear of him,
and consequently acted from the impulse of their natural feeling; so
that he was the better enabled to obtain a correct knowledge of their
real disposition and habits.”

Prom my own familiar intercourse with the natives, this last reflection
still more forcibly applies to myself.




CHAPTER XLIX.
SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED


We have glanced at their moral and religious condition; let us see how
it is with them socially, and in other respects.

It has been said that the only way to civilize a people is to form in
them habits of industry. Judged by this principle, the Tahitians are
less civilized now than formerly. True, their constitutional indolence
is excessive; but surely, if the spirit of Christianity is among them,
so unchristian a vice ought to be, at least, partially remedied. But
the reverse is the fact. Instead of acquiring new occupations, old ones
have been discontinued.

As previously remarked, the manufacture of tappa is nearly obsolete in
many parts of the island. So, too, with that of the native tools and
domestic utensils; very few of which are now fabricated, since the
superiority of European wares has been made so evident.

This, however, would be all very well were the natives to apply
themselves to such occupations as would enable them to supply the few
articles they need. But they are far from doing so; and the majority
being unable to obtain European substitutes for many things before made
by themselves, the inevitable consequence is seen in the present
wretched and destitute mode of life among the common people. To me so
recently from a primitive valley of the Marquesas, the aspect of most
of the dwellings of the poorer Tahitians, and their general habits,
seemed anything but tidy; nor could I avoid a comparison, immeasurably
to the disadvantage of these partially civilized islanders.

In Tahiti, the people have nothing to do; and idleness, everywhere, is
the parent of vice. “There is scarcely anything,” says the good old
Quaker Wheeler, “so striking, or pitiable, as their aimless, nerveless
mode of spending life.”

Attempts have repeatedly been made to rouse them from their
sluggishness; but in vain. Several years ago, the cultivation of cotton
was introduced; and, with their usual love of novelty, they went to
work with great alacrity; but the interest excited quickly subsided,
and now, not a pound of the article is raised.

About the same time, machinery for weaving was sent out from London;
and a factory was started at Afrehitoo, in Imeeo. The whiz of the
wheels and spindles brought in volunteers from all quarters, who deemed
it a privilege to be admitted to work: yet, in six months, not a boy
could be hired; and the machinery was knocked down, and packed off to
Sydney.

It was the same way with the cultivation of the sugar-cane, a plant
indigenous to the island; peculiarly fitted to the soil and climate,
and of so excellent a quality that Bligh took slips of it to the West
Indies. All the plantations went on famously for a while; the natives
swarming in the fields like ants, and making a prodigious stir. What
few plantations now remain are owned and worked by whites; who would
rather pay a drunken sailor eighteen or twenty Spanish dollars a month,
than hire a sober native for his “fish and tarro.”

It is well worthy remark here, that every evidence of civilization
among the South Sea Islands directly pertains to foreigners; though the
fact of such evidence existing at all is usually urged as a proof of
the elevated condition of the natives. Thus, at Honolulu, the capital
of the Sandwich Islands, there are fine dwelling-houses, several
hotels, and barber-shops, ay, even billiard-rooms; but all these are
owned and used, be it observed, by whites. There are tailors, and
blacksmiths, and carpenters also; but not one of them is a native.

The fact is, that the mechanical and agricultural employment of
civilized life require a kind of exertion altogether too steady and
sustained to agree with an indolent people like the Polynesians.
Calculated for a state of nature, in a climate providentially adapted
to it, they are unfit for any other. Nay, as a race, they cannot
otherwise long exist.

The following statement speaks for itself.

About the year 1777, Captain Cook estimated the population of Tahiti at
about two hundred thousand. By a regular census, taken some four or
five years ago, it was found to be only nine thousand. This amazing
decrease not only shows the malignancy of the evils necessary to
produce it; but, from the fact, the inference unavoidably follows that
all the wars, child murders, and other depopulating causes, alleged to
have existed in former times, were nothing in comparison to them.

These evils, of course, are solely of foreign origin. To say nothing of
the effects of drunkenness, the occasional inroads of the small-pox,
and other things which might be mentioned, it is sufficient to allude
to a virulent disease which now taints the blood of at least two-thirds
of the common people of the island; and, in some form or other, is
transmitted from father to son.

Their first horror and consternation at the earlier ravages of this
scourge were pitiable in the extreme. The very name bestowed upon it is
a combination of all that is horrid and unmentionable to a civilized
being.

Distracted with their sufferings, they brought forth their sick before
the missionaries, when they were preaching, and cried out, “Lies, lies!
you tell us of salvation; and, behold, we are dying. We want no other
salvation than to live in this world. Where are there any saved through
your speech? Pomaree is dead; and we are all dying with your cursed
diseases. When will you give over?”

At present, the virulence of the disorder, in individual cases, has
somewhat abated; but the poison is only the more widely diffused.

“How dreadful and appalling,” breaks forth old Wheeler, “the
consideration that the intercourse of distant nations should have
entailed upon these poor, untutored islanders a curse unprecedented,
and unheard of, in the annals of history.”

In view of these things, who can remain blind to the fact that, so far
as mere temporal felicity is concerned, the Tahitians are far worse off
now, than formerly; and although their circumstances, upon the whole,
are bettered by the presence of the missionaries, the benefits
conferred by the latter become utterly insignificant when confronted
with the vast preponderance of evil brought about by other means.

Their prospects are hopeless. Nor can the most devoted efforts now
exempt them from furnishing a marked illustration of a principle which
history has always exemplified. Years ago brought to a stand, where all
that is corrupt in barbarism and civilization unite, to the exclusion
of the virtues of either state; like other uncivilized beings, brought
into contact with Europeans, they must here remain stationary until
utterly extinct.

The islanders themselves are mournfully watching their doom.

Several years since, Pomaree II. said to Tyreman and Bennet, the
deputies of the London Missionary Society, “You have come to see me at
a very bad time. Your ancestors came in the time of men, when Tahiti
was inhabited: you are come to behold just the remnant of my people.”

Of like import was the prediction of Teearmoar, the high-priest of
Paree; who lived over a hundred years ago. I have frequently heard it
chanted, in a low, sad tone, by aged Tahitiana:—

“A harree ta fow,
A toro ta farraro,
A now ta tararta.”

“The palm-tree shall grow,
The coral shall spread,
But man shall cease.”




CHAPTER L.
SOMETHING HAPPENS TO LONG GHOST


We will now return to the narrative.

The day before the Julia sailed, Dr. Johnson paid his last call. He was
not quite so bland as usual. All he wanted was the men’s names to a
paper, certifying to their having received from him sundry medicaments
therein mentioned. This voucher, endorsed by Captain Guy, secured his
pay. But he would not have obtained for it the sailors’ signs manual,
had either the doctor or myself been present at the time.

Now, my long friend wasted no love upon Johnson; but, for reasons of
his own, hated him heartily: all the same thing in one sense; for
either passion argues an object deserving thereof. And so, to be hated
cordially, is only a left-handed compliment; which shows how foolish it
is to be bitter against anyone.

For my own part, I merely felt a cool, purely incidental, and passive
contempt for Johnson, as a selfish, mercenary apothecary, and hence, I
often remonstrated with Long Ghost when he flew out against him, and
heaped upon him all manner of scurrilous epithets. In his professional
brother’s presence, however, he never acted thus; maintaining an
amiable exterior, to help along the jokes which were played.

I am now going to tell another story in which my long friend figures
with the physician: I do not wish to bring one or the other of them too
often upon the stage; but as the thing actually happened, I must relate
it.

A few days after Johnson presented his bill, as above mentioned, the
doctor expressed to me his regret that, although he (Johnson) had
apparently been played off for our entertainment, yet, nevertheless, he
had made money out of the transaction. And I wonder, added the doctor,
if that now he cannot expect to receive any further pay, he could be
induced to call again.

By a curious coincidence, not five minutes after making this
observation, Doctor Long Ghost himself fell down in an unaccountable
fit; and without asking anybody’s leave, Captain Bob, who was by, at
once dispatched a boy, hot foot, for Johnson.

Meanwhile, we carried him into the Calabooza; and the natives, who
assembled in numbers, suggested various modes of treatment. One rather
energetic practitioner was for holding the patient by the shoulders,
while somebody tugged at his feet. This resuscitatory operation was
called the “Potata”; but thinking our long comrade sufficiently lengthy
without additional stretching, we declined potataing him.

Presently the physician was spied coming along the Broom Road at a
great rate, and so absorbed in the business of locomotion, that he
heeded not the imprudence of being in a hurry in a tropical climate. He
was in a profuse perspiration; which must have been owing to the warmth
of his feelings, notwithstanding we had supposed him a man of no heart.
But his benevolent haste upon this occasion was subsequently accounted
for: it merely arose from professional curiosity to behold a case most
unusual in his Polynesian practice. Now, under certain circumstances,
sailors, generally so frolicsome, are exceedingly particular in having
everything conducted with the strictest propriety. Accordingly, they
deputed me, as his intimate friend, to sit at Long Ghost’s head, so as
to be ready to officiate as “spokesman” and answer all questions
propounded, the rest to keep silent.

“What’s the matter?” exclaimed Johnson, out of breath, and bursting
into the Calabooza: “how did it happen?—speak quick!” and he looked at
Long Ghost.

I told him how the fit came on.

“Singular”—he observed—“very: good enough pulse;” and he let go of it,
and placed his hand upon the heart.

“But what’s all that frothing at the mouth?” he continued; “and bless
me! look at the abdomen!”

The region thus denominated exhibited the most unaccountable symptoms.
A low, rumbling sound was heard; and a sort of undulation was
discernible beneath the thin cotton frock.

“Colic, sir?” suggested a bystander.

“Colic be hanged!” shouted the physician; “who ever heard of anybody in
a trance of the colic?”

During this, the patient lay upon his back, stark and straight, giving
no signs of life except those above mentioned.

“I’ll bleed him!” cried Johnson at last—“run for a calabash, one of
you!”

“Life ho!” here sung out Navy Bob, as if he had just spied a sail.

“What under the sun’s the matter with him!” cried the physician,
starting at the appearance of the mouth, which had jerked to one side,
and there remained fixed.

“Pr’aps it’s St. Witus’s hornpipe,” suggested Bob.

“Hold the calabash!”—and the lancet was out in a moment.

But before the deed could be done, the face became natural;—a sigh was
heaved;—the eyelids quivered, opened, closed; and Long Ghost, twitching
all over, rolled on his side, and breathed audibly. By degrees, he
became sufficiently recovered to speak.

After trying to get something coherent out of him, Johnson withdrew;
evidently disappointed in the scientific interest of the case. Soon
after his departure, the doctor sat up; and upon being asked what upon
earth ailed him, shook his head mysteriously. He then deplored the
hardship of being an invalid in such a place, where there was not the
slightest provision for his comfort. This awakened the compassion of
our good old keeper, who offered to send him to a place where he would
be better cared for. Long Ghost acquiesced; and being at once mounted
upon the shoulders of four of Captain Bob’s men, was marched off in
state, like the Grand Lama of Thibet.

Now, I do not pretend to account for his remarkable swoon; but his
reason for suffering himself to be thus removed from the Calabooza was
strongly suspected to be nothing more than a desire to insure more
regularity in his dinner-hour; hoping that the benevolent native to
whom he was going would set a good table.

The next morning, we were all envying his fortune; when, of a sudden,
he bolted in upon us, looking decidedly out of humour.

“Hang it!” he cried; “I’m worse off than ever; let me have some
breakfast!” We lowered our slender bag of ship-stores from a rafter,
and handed him a biscuit. While this was being munched, he went on and
told us his story.

“After leaving here, they trotted me back into a valley, and left me in
a hut, where an old woman lived by herself. This must be the nurse,
thought I; and so I asked her to kill a pig, and bake it; for I felt my
appetite returning. ‘Ha! Hal—oee mattee—mattee nuee’—(no, no; you too
sick). ‘The devil mattee ye,’ said I—‘give me something to eat!’ But
nothing could be had. Night coming on, I had to stay. Creeping into a
corner, I tried to sleep; but it was to no purpose;—the old crone must
have had the quinsy, or something else; and she kept up such a wheezing
and choking that at last I sprang up, and groped after her; but she
hobbled away like a goblin; and that was the last of her. As soon as
the sun rose, I made the best of my way back; and here I am.” He never
left us more, nor ever had a second fit.




CHAPTER LI.
WILSON GIVES US THE CUT—DEPARTURE FOR IMEEO


About three weeks after the Julia’s sailing, our conditions began to be
a little precarious. We were without any regular supply of food; the
arrival of ships was growing less frequent; and, what was worse yet,
all the natives but good old Captain Bob began to tire of us. Nor was
this to be wondered at; we were obliged to live upon their benevolence,
when they had little enough for themselves. Besides, we were sometimes
driven to acts of marauding; such as kidnapping pigs, and cooking them
in the groves; at which their proprietors were by no means pleased.

In this state of affairs, we determined to march off to the consul in a
body; and, as he had brought us to these straits, demand an adequate
maintenance.

On the point of starting, Captain Bob’s men raised the most outrageous
cries, and tried to prevent us. Though hitherto we had strolled about
wherever we pleased, this grand conjunction of our whole force, upon
one particular expedition, seemed to alarm them. But we assured them
that we were not going to assault the village; and so, after a good
deal of gibberish, they permitted us to leave.

We went straight to the Pritchard residence, where the consul dwelt.
This house—to which I have before referred—is quite commodious. It has
a wide verandah, glazed windows, and other appurtenances of a civilized
mansion. Upon the lawn in front are palm-trees standing erect here and
there, like sentinels. The Consular Office, a small building by itself,
is inclosed by the same picket which fences in the lawn.

We found the office closed; but, in the verandah of the dwelling-house,
was a lady performing a tonsorial operation on the head of a
prim-looking, elderly European, in a low, white cravat;—the most
domestic little scene I had witnessed since leaving home. Bent upon an
interview with Wilson, the sailors now deputed the doctor to step
forward as a polite inquirer after his health.

The pair stared very hard as he advanced; but no ways disconcerted, he
saluted them gravely, and inquired for the consul.

Upon being informed that he had gone down to the beach, we proceeded in
that direction; and soon met a native, who told us that, apprised of
our vicinity, Wilson was keeping out of the way. We resolved to meet
him; and passing through the village, he suddenly came walking toward
us; having apparently made up his mind that any attempt to elude us
would be useless.

“What do you want of me, you rascals?” he cried—a greeting which
provoked a retort in no measured terms. At this juncture, the natives
began to crowd round, and several foreigners strolled along. Caught in
the very act of speaking to such disreputable acquaintances, Wilson now
fidgeted, and moved rapidly toward his office; the men following.
Turning upon them incensed, he bade them be off—he would have nothing
more to say to us; and then, hurriedly addressing Captain Bob in
Tahitian, he hastened on, and never stopped till the postern of
Pritchard’s wicket was closed behind him.

Our good old keeper was now highly excited, bustling about in his huge
petticoats, and conjuring us to return to the Calabooza. After a little
debate, we acquiesced.

This interview was decisive. Sensible that none of the charges brought
against us would stand, yet unwilling formally to withdraw them, the
consul now wished to get rid of us altogether; but without being
suspected of encouraging our escape. Thus only could we account for his
conduct.

Some of the party, however, with a devotion to principle truly heroic,
swore they would never leave him, happen what might. For my own part, I
began to long for a change; and as there seemed to be no getting away
in a ship, I resolved to hit upon some other expedient. But first, I
cast about for a comrade; and of course the long doctor was chosen. We
at once laid our heads together; and for the present, resolved to
disclose nothing to the rest.

A few days previous, I had fallen in with a couple of Yankee lads,
twins, who, originally deserting their ship at Tanning’s Island (an
uninhabited spot, but exceedingly prolific in fruit of all kinds), had,
after a long residence there, roved about among the Society group. They
were last from Imeeo—the island immediately adjoining—where they had
been in the employ of two foreigners who had recently started a
plantation there. These persons, they said, had charged them to send
over from Papeetee, if they could, two white men for field-labourers.

Now, all but the prospect of digging and delving suited us exactly; but
the opportunity for leaving the island was not to be slighted; and so
we held ourselves in readiness to return with the planters; who, in a
day or two, were expected to visit Papeetee in their boat.

At the interview which ensued, we were introduced to them as Peter and
Paul; and they agreed to give Peter and Paul fifteen silver dollars a
month, promising something more should we remain with them permanently.
What they wanted was men who would stay. To elude the natives—many of
whom, not exactly understanding our relations with the consul, might
arrest us, were they to see us departing—the coming midnight was
appointed for that purpose.

When the hour drew nigh, we disclosed our intention to the rest. Some
upbraided us for deserting them; others applauded, and said that, on
the first opportunity, they would follow our example. At last, we bade
them farewell. And there would now be a serene sadness in thinking over
the scene—since we never saw them again—had not all been dashed by
M’Gee’s picking the doctor’s pocket of a jack-knife, in the very act of
embracing him.

We stole down to the beach, where, under the shadow of a grove, the
boat was waiting. After some delay, we shipped the oars, and pulling
outside of the reef, set the sail; and with a fair wind, glided away
for Imeeo.

It was a pleasant trip. The moon was up—the air, warm—the waves,
musical—and all above was the tropical night, one purple vault hung
round with soft, trembling stars.

The channel is some five leagues wide. On one hand, you have the three
great peaks of Tahiti lording it over ranges of mountains and valleys;
and on the other, the equally romantic elevations of Imeeo, high above
which a lone peak, called by our companions, “the Marling-pike,” shot
up its verdant spire.

The planters were quite sociable. They had been sea-faring men, and
this, of course, was a bond between us. To strengthen it, a flask of
wine was produced, one of several which had been procured in person
from the French admiral’s steward; for whom the planters, when on a
former visit to Papeetee, had done a good turn, by introducing the
amorous Frenchman to the ladies ashore. Besides this, they had a
calabash filled with wild boar’s meat, baked yams, bread-fruit, and
Tombez potatoes. Pipes and tobacco also were produced; and while
regaling ourselves, plenty of stories were told about the neighbouring
islands.

At last we heard the roar of the Imeeo reef; and gliding through a
break, floated over the expanse within, which was smooth as a young
girl’s brow, and beached the boat.




CHAPTER LII.
THE VALLEY OF MARTAIR


We went up through groves to an open space, where we heard voices, and
a light was seen glimmering from out a bamboo dwelling. It was the
planters’ retreat; and in their absence, several girls were keeping
house, assisted by an old native, who, wrapped up in tappa, lay in the
corner, smoking.

A hasty meal was prepared, and after it we essayed a nap; but, alas! a
plague, little anticipated, prevented. Unknown in Tahiti, the
mosquitoes here fairly eddied round us. But more of them anon.

We were up betimes, and strolled out to view the country. We were in
the valley of Martair; shut in, on both sides, by lofty hills. Here and
there were steep cliffs, gay with flowering shrubs, or hung with
pendulous vines, swinging blossoms in the air. Of considerable width at
the sea, the vale contracts as it runs inland; terminating, at the
distance of several miles, in a range of the most grotesque elevations,
which seem embattled with turrets and towers, grown over with verdure,
and waving with trees. The valley itself is a wilderness of woodland;
with links of streams flashing through, and narrow pathways fairly
tunnelled through masses of foliage.

All alone, in this wild place, was the abode of the planters; the only
one back from the beach—their sole neighbours, the few fishermen and
their families, dwelling in a small grove of cocoa-nut trees whose
roots were washed by the sea.

The cleared tract which they occupied comprised some thirty acres,
level as a prairie, part of which was under cultivation; the whole
being fenced in by a stout palisade of trunks and boughs of trees
staked firmly in the ground. This was necessary as a defence against
the wild cattle and hogs overrunning the island.

Thus far, Tombez potatoes were the principal crop raised; a ready sale
for them being obtained among the shipping touching at Papeetee. There
was a small patch of the taro, or Indian turnip, also; another of yams;
and in one corner, a thrifty growth of the sugar-cane, just ripening.

On the side of the inclosure next the sea was the house; newly built of
bamboos, in the native style. The furniture consisted of a couple of
sea-chests, an old box, a few cooking utensils, and agricultural tools;
together with three fowling-pieces, hanging from a rafter; and two
enormous hammocks swinging in opposite corners, and composed of dried
bullocks’ hides, stretched out with poles.

The whole plantation was shut in by a dense forest; and, close by the
house, a dwarfed “Aoa,” or species of banian-tree, had purposely been
left twisting over the palisade, in the most grotesque manner, and thus
made a pleasant shade. The branches of this curious tree afforded low
perches, upon which the natives frequently squatted, after the fashion
of their race, and smoked and gossiped by the hour.

We had a good breakfast of fish—speared by the natives, before sunrise,
on the reef—pudding of Indian turnip, fried bananas, and roasted
bread-fruit.

During the repast, our new friends were quite sociable and
communicative. It seems that, like nearly all uneducated foreigners,
residing in Polynesia, they had, some time previous, deserted from a
ship; and, having heard a good deal about the money to be made by
raising supplies for whaling-vessels, they determined upon embarking in
the business. Strolling about, with this intention, they, at last, came
to Martair; and, thinking the soil would suit, set themselves to work.
They began by finding out the owner of the particular spot coveted, and
then making a “tayo” of him.

He turned out to be Tonoi, the chief of the fishermen: who, one day,
when exhilarated with brandy, tore his meagre tappa from his loins, and
gave me to know that he was allied by blood with Pomaree herself; and
that his mother came from the illustrious race of pontiffs, who, in old
times, swayed their bamboo crosier over all the pagans of Imeeo. A
regal, and right reverend lineage! But, at the time I speak of, the
dusky noble was in decayed circumstances, and, therefore, by no means
unwilling to alienate a few useless acres. As an equivalent, he
received from the strangers two or three rheumatic old muskets, several
red woollen shirts, and a promise to be provided for in his old age: he
was always to find a home with the planters.

Desirous of living on the cosy footing of a father-in-law, he frankly
offered his two daughters for wives; but as such, they were politely
declined; the adventurers, though not averse to courting, being
unwilling to entangle themselves in a matrimonial alliance, however
splendid in point of family.

Tonoi’s men, the fishermen of the grove, were a sad set. Secluded, in a
great measure, from the ministrations of the missionaries, they gave
themselves up to all manner of lazy wickedness. Strolling among the
trees of a morning, you came upon them napping on the shady side of a
canoe hauled up among the bushes; lying on a tree smoking; or, more
frequently still, gambling with pebbles; though, a little tobacco
excepted, what they gambled for at their outlandish games, it would be
hard to tell. Other idle diversions they had also, in which they seemed
to take great delight. As for fishing, it employed but a small part of
their time. Upon the whole, they were a merry, indigent, godless race.

Tonoi, the old sinner, leaning against the fallen trunk of a cocoa-nut
tree, invariably squandered his mornings at pebbles; a gray-headed rook
of a native regularly plucking him of every other stick of tobacco
obtained from his friends, the planters. Toward afternoon, he strolled
back to their abode; where he tarried till the next morning, smoking
and snoozing, and, at times, prating about the hapless fortunes of the
House of Tonoi. But like any other easy-going old dotard, he seemed for
the most part perfectly content with cheerful board and lodging.

On the whole, the valley of Martair was the quietest place imaginable.
Could the mosquitoes be induced to emigrate, one might spend the month
of August there quite pleasantly. But this was not the case with the
luckless Long Ghost and myself; as will presently be seen.




CHAPTER LIII.
FARMING IN POLYNESIA


The planters were both whole-souled fellows; but, in other respects, as
unlike as possible.

One was a tall, robust Yankee, born in the backwoods of Maine, sallow,
and with a long face;—the other was a short little Cockney, who had
first clapped his eyes on the Monument.

The voice of Zeke, the Yankee, had a twang like a cracked viol; and
Shorty (as his comrade called him), clipped the aspirate from every
word beginning with one. The latter, though not the tallest man in the
world, was a good-looking young fellow of twenty-five. His cheeks were
dyed with the fine Saxon red, burned deeper from his roving life: his
blue eye opened well, and a profusion of fair hair curled over a
well-shaped head.

But Zeke was no beauty. A strong, ugly man, he was well adapted for
manual labour; and that was all. His eyes were made to see with, and
not for ogling. Compared with the Cockney, he was grave, and rather
taciturn; but there was a deal of good old humour bottled up in him,
after all. For the rest, he was frank, good-hearted, shrewd, and
resolute; and like Shorty, quite illiterate.

Though a curious conjunction, the pair got along together famously.
But, as no two men were ever united in any enterprise without one
getting the upper hand of the other, so in most matters Zeke had his
own way. Shorty, too, had imbibed from him a spirit of invincible
industry; and Heaven only knows what ideas of making a fortune on their
plantation.

We were much concerned at this; for the prospect of their setting us,
in their own persons, an example of downright hard labour, was anything
but agreeable. But it was now too late to repent what we had done.

The first day—thank fortune—we did nothing. Having treated us as guests
thus far, they no doubt thought it would be wanting in delicacy to set
us to work before the compliments of the occasion were well over. The
next morning, however, they both looked business-like, and we were put
to.

“Wall, b’ys” (boys), said Zeke, knocking the ashes out of his pipe,
after breakfast—“we must get at it. Shorty, give Peter there (the
doctor), the big hoe, and Paul the other, and let’s be off.” Going to a
corner, Shorty brought forth three of the implements; and distributing
them impartially, trudged on after his partner, who took the lead with
something in the shape of an axe.

For a moment left alone in the house, we looked at each other, quaking.
We were each equipped with a great, clumsy piece of a tree, armed at
one end with a heavy, flat mass of iron.

The cutlery part—especially adapted to a primitive soil—was an
importation from Sydney; the handles must have been of domestic
manufacture. “Hoes”—so called—we had heard of, and seen; but they were
harmless in comparison with the tools in our hands.

“What’s to be done with them?” inquired I of Peter.

“Lift them up and down,” he replied; “or put them in motion some way or
other. Paul, we are in a scrape—but hark! they are calling;” and
shouldering the hoes, off we marched.

Our destination was the farther side of the plantation, where the
ground, cleared in part, had not yet been broken up; but they were now
setting about it. Upon halting, I asked why a plough was not used; some
of the young wild steers might be caught and trained for draught.

Zeke replied that, for such a purpose, no cattle, to his knowledge, had
ever been used in any part of Polynesia. As for the soil of Martair, so
obstructed was it with roots, crossing and recrossing each other at all
points, that no kind of a plough could be used to advantage. The heavy
Sydney hoes were the only thing for such land.

Our work was now before us; but, previous to commencing operations, I
endeavoured to engage the Yankee in a little further friendly chat
concerning the nature of virgin soils in general, and that of the
valley of Martair in particular. So masterly a stratagem made Long
Ghost brighten up; and he stood by ready to join in. But what our
friend had to say about agriculture all referred to the particular part
of his plantation upon which we stood; and having communicated enough
on this head to enable us to set to work to the best advantage, he fell
to, himself; and Shorty, who had been looking on, followed suit.

The surface, here and there, presented closely amputated branches of
what had once been a dense thicket. They seemed purposely left
projecting, as if to furnish a handle whereby to drag out the roots
beneath. After loosening the hard soil, by dint of much thumping and
pounding, the Yankee jerked one of the roots this way and that,
twisting it round and round, and then tugging at it horizontally.

“Come! lend us a hand!” he cried, at last; and running up, we all four
strained away in concert. The tough obstacle convulsed the surface with
throes and spasms; but stuck fast, notwithstanding.

“Dumn it!” cried Zeke, “we’ll have to get a rope; run to the house,
Shorty, and fetch one.”

The end of this being attached, we took plenty of room, and strained
away once more.

“Give us a song, Shorty,” said the doctor; who was rather sociable, on
a short acquaintance. Where the work to be accomplished is any way
difficult, this mode of enlivening toil is quite efficacious among
sailors. So willing to make everything as cheerful as possible, Shorty
struck up, “Were you ever in Dumbarton?” a marvellously inspiring, but
somewhat indecorous windlass chorus.

At last, the Yankee cast a damper on his enthusiasm by exclaiming, in a
pet, “Oh! dumn your singing! keep quiet, and pull away!” This we now
did, in the most uninteresting silence; until, with a jerk that made
every elbow hum, the root dragged out; and most inelegantly, we all
landed upon the ground. The doctor, quite exhausted, stayed there; and,
deluded into believing that, after so doughty a performance, we would
be allowed a cessation of toil, took off his hat, and fanned himself.

“Rayther a hard customer, that, Peter,” observed the Yankee, going up
to him: “but it’s no use for any on ’em to hang back; for I’m dumned if
they hain’t got to come out, whether or no. Hurrah! let’s get at it
agin!”

“Mercy!” ejaculated the doctor, rising slowly, and turning round.
“He’ll be the death of us!”

Falling to with our hoes again, we worked singly, or together, as
occasion required, until “Nooning Time” came.

The period, so called by the planters, embraced about three hours in
the middle of the day; during which it was so excessively hot, in this
still, brooding valley, shut out from the Trades, and only open toward
the leeward side of the island, that labour in the sun was out of the
question. To use a hyperbolical phrase of Shorty’s, “It was ’ot enough
to melt the nose h’off a brass monkey.”

Returning to the house, Shorty, assisted by old Tonoi, cooked the
dinner; and, after we had all partaken thereof, both the Cockney and
Zeke threw themselves into one of the hammocks, inviting us to occupy
the other. Thinking it no bad idea, we did so; and, after skirmishing
with the mosquitoes, managed to fall into a doze. As for the planters,
more accustomed to “Nooning,” they, at once, presented a nuptial back
to each other; and were soon snoring away at a great rate. Tonoi
snoozed on a mat, in one corner.

At last, we were roused by Zeke’s crying out, “Up b’ys; up! rise, and
shine; time to get at it agin!”

Looking at the doctor, I perceived, very plainly, that he had decided
upon something.

In a languid voice, he told Zeke that he was not very well: indeed,
that he had not been himself for some time past; though a little rest,
no doubt, would recruit him. The Yankee thinking, from this, that our
valuable services might be lost to him altogether, were he too hard
upon us at the outset, at once begged us both to consult our own
feelings, and not exert ourselves for the present, unless we felt like
it. Then—without recognizing the fact that my comrade claimed to be
actually unwell—he simply suggested that, since he was so tired, he had
better, perhaps, swing in his hammock for the rest of the day. If
agreeable, however, I myself might accompany him upon a little
bullock-hunting excursion in the neighbouring hills. In this
proposition, I gladly acquiesced; though Peter, who was a great
sportsman, put on a long face. The muskets and ammunition were
forthwith got from overhead; and, everything being then ready, Zeke
cried out, “Tonoi! come; aramai! (get up) we want you for pilot.
Shorty, my lad, look arter things, you know; and if you likes, why,
there’s them roots in the field yonder.”

Having thus arranged his domestic affairs to please himself, though
little to Shorty’s satisfaction, I thought, he slung his powder-horn
over his shoulder, and we started. Tonoi was, at once, sent on in
advance; and leaving the plantation, he struck into a path which led
toward the mountains.

After hurrying through the thickets for some time, we came out into the
sunlight, in an open glade, just under the shadow of the hills. Here,
Zeke pointed aloft to a beetling crag far distant, where a bullock,
with horns thrown back, stood like a statue.




CHAPTER LIV.
SOME ACCOUNT OF THE WILD CATTLE IN POLYNESIA


Before we proceed further, a word or two concerning these wild cattle,
and the way they came on the island.

Some fifty years ago, Vancouver left several bullocks, sheep and goats,
at various places in the Society group. He instructed the natives to
look after the animals carefully; and by no means to slaughter any
until a considerable stock had accumulated.

The sheep must have died off: for I never saw a solitary fleece in any
part of Polynesia. The pair left were an ill-assorted couple, perhaps;
separated in disgust, and died without issue.

As for the goats, occasionally you come across a black, misanthropic
ram, nibbling the scant herbage of some height inaccessible to man, in
preference to the sweet grasses of the valley below. The goats are not
very numerous.

The bullocks, coming of a prolific ancestry, are a hearty set, racing
over the island of Imeeo in considerable numbers, though in Tahiti but
few of them are seen. At the former place, the original pair must have
scampered off to the interior since it is now so thickly populated by
their wild progeny. The herds are the private property of Queen
Pomaree; from whom the planters had obtained permission to shoot for
their own use as many as they pleased.

The natives stand in great awe of these cattle; and for this reason are
excessively timid in crossing the island, preferring rather to sail
round to an opposite village in their canoes.

Tonoi abounded in bullock stories; most of which, by the bye, had a
spice of the marvellous. The following is one of these.

Once upon a time, he was going over the hills with a brother—now no
more—when a great bull came bellowing out of a wood, and both took to
their heels. The old chief sprang into a tree; his companion, flying in
an opposite direction, was pursued, and, in the very act of reaching up
to a bough, trampled underfoot. The unhappy man was then gored—tossed
in the air—and finally run away with on the bull’s horns. More dead
than alive, Tonoi waited till all was over, and then made the best of
his way home. The neighbours, armed with two or three muskets, at once
started to recover, if possible, his unfortunate brother’s remains. At
nightfall, they returned without discovering any trace of him; but the
next morning, Tonoi himself caught a glimpse of the bullock, marching
across the mountain’s brow, with a long dark object borne aloft on his
horns.

Having referred to Vancouver’s attempts to colonize the islands with
useful quadrupeds, we may as well say something concerning his success
upon Hawaii, one of the largest islands in the whole Polynesian
Archipelago; and which gives the native name to the well-known cluster
named by Cook in honour of Lord Sandwich.

Hawaii is some one hundred leagues in circuit, and covers an area of
over four thousand miles. Until within a few years past, its interior
was almost unknown, even to the inhabitants themselves, who, for ages,
had been prevented from wandering thither by certain strange
superstitions. Pelee, the terrific goddess of the volcanoes Mount Eoa
and Mount Kea, was supposed to guard all the passes to the extensive
valleys lying round their base. There are legends of her having chased
with streams of fire several impious adventurers. Near Hilo, a
jet-black cliff is shown, with the vitreous torrent apparently pouring
over into the sea: just as it cooled after one of these supernatural
eruptions.

To these inland valleys, and the adjoining hillsides, which are clothed
in the most luxuriant vegetation, Vancouver’s bullocks soon wandered;
and unmolested for a long period, multiplied in vast herds.

Some twelve or fifteen years ago, the natives lost sight of their
superstitions, and learning the value of the hides in commerce, began
hunting the creatures that wore them; but being very fearful and
awkward in a business so novel, their success was small; and it was not
until the arrival of a party of Spanish hunters, men regularly trained
to their calling upon the plains of California, that the work of
slaughter was fairly begun.

The Spaniards were showy fellows, tricked out in gay blankets, leggings
worked with porcupine quills, and jingling spurs. Mounted upon trained
Indian mares, these heroes pursued their prey up to the very base of
the burning mountains; making the profoundest solitudes ring with their
shouts, and flinging the lasso under the very nose of the vixen goddess
Pelee. Hilo, a village upon the coast, was their place of resort; and
thither flocked roving whites from all the islands of the group. As
pupils of the dashing Spaniards, many of these dissipated fellows,
quaffing too freely of the stirrup-cup, and riding headlong after the
herds, when they reeled in the saddle, were unhorsed and killed.

This was about the year 1835, when the present king, Tammahamaha III.,
was a lad. With royal impudence laying claim to the sole property of
the cattle, he was delighted with the idea of receiving one of every
two silver dollars paid down for their hides; so, with no thought for
the future, the work of extermination went madly on. In three years’
time, eighteen thousand bullocks were slain, almost entirely upon the
single island of Hawaii.

The herds being thus nearly destroyed, the sagacious young prince
imposed a rigorous “taboo” upon the few surviving cattle, which was to
remain in force for ten years. During this period—not yet expired—all
hunting is forbidden, unless directly authorized by the king.

The massacre of the cattle extended to the hapless goats. In one year,
three thousand of their skins were sold to the merchants of Honolulu,
fetching a quartila, or a shilling sterling apiece.

After this digression, it is time to run on after Tonoi and the Yankee.




CHAPTER LV.
A HUNTING RAMBLE WITH ZEKE


At the foot of the mountain, a steep path went up among rocks and
clefts mantled with verdure. Here and there were green gulfs, down
which it made one giddy to peep. At last we gained an overhanging,
wooded shelf of land which crowned the heights; and along this, the
path, well shaded, ran like a gallery.

In every direction the scenery was enchanting. There was a low,
rustling breeze; and below, in the vale, the leaves were quivering; the
sea lay, blue and serene, in the distance; and inland the surface
swelled up, ridge after ridge, and peak upon peak, all bathed in the
Indian haze of the Tropics, and dreamy to look upon. Still valleys,
leagues away, reposed in the deep shadows of the mountains; and here
and there, waterfalls lifted up their voices in the solitude. High
above all, and central, the “Marling-spike” lifted its finger. Upon the
hillsides, small groups of bullocks were seen; some quietly browsing;
others slowly winding into the valleys.

We went on, directing our course for a slope of these hills, a mile or
two further, where the nearest bullocks were seen.

We were cautious in keeping to the windward of them; their sense of
smell and hearing being, like those of all wild creatures, exceedingly
acute.

As there was no knowing that we might not surprise some other kind of
game in the coverts through which we were passing, we crept along
warily.

The wild hogs of the island are uncommonly fierce; and as they often
attack the natives, I could not help following Tonoi’s example of once
in a while peeping in under the foliage. Frequent retrospective glances
also served to assure me that our retreat was not cut off.

As we rounded a clump of bushes, a noise behind them, like the
crackling of dry branches, broke the stillness. In an instant, Tonoi’s
hand was on a bough, ready for a spring, and Zeke’s finger touched the
trigger of his piece. Again the stillness was broken; and thinking it
high time to get ready, I brought my musket to my shoulder.

“Look sharp!” cried the Yankee; and dropping on one knee, he brushed
the twigs aside. Presently, off went his piece; and with a wild snort,
a black, bristling boar—his cherry red lip curled up by two glittering
tusks—dashed, unharmed, across the path, and crashed through the
opposite thicket. I saluted him with a charge as he disappeared; but
not the slightest notice was taken of the civility.

By this time, Tonoi, the illustrious descendant of the Bishops of
Imeeo, was twenty feet from the ground. “Aramai! come down, you old
fool!” cried the Yankee; “the pesky critter’s on t’other side of the
island afore this.”

“I rayther guess,” he continued, as we began reloading, “that we’ve
spoiled sport by firing at that ’ere tarnal hog. Them bullocks heard
the racket, and are flinging their tails about now on the keen jump.
Quick, Paul, and let’s climb that rock yonder, and see if so be there’s
any in sight.”

But none were to be seen, except at such a distance that they looked
like ants.

As evening was now at hand, my companion proposed our returning home
forthwith; and then, after a sound night’s rest, starting in the
morning upon a good day’s hunt with the whole force of the plantation.

Following another pass in descending into the valley, we passed through
some nobly wooded land on the face of the mountain.

One variety of tree particularly attracted my attention. The dark mossy
stem, over seventy feet high, was perfectly branchless for many feet
above the ground, when it shot out in broad boughs laden with lustrous
leaves of the deepest green. And all round the lower part of the trunk,
thin, slab-like buttresses of bark, perfectly smooth, and radiating
from a common centre, projected along the ground for at least two
yards. From below, these natural props tapered upward until gradually
blended with the trunk itself. There were signs of the wild cattle
having sheltered themselves behind them. Zeke called this the canoe
tree; as in old times it supplied the navies of the Kings of Tahiti.
For canoe building, the woods is still used. Being extremely dense, and
impervious to worms, it is very durable.

Emerging from the forest, when half-way down the hillside, we came upon
an open space, covered with ferns and grass, over which a few lonely
trees were casting long shadows in the setting sun. Here, a piece of
ground some hundred feet square, covered with weeds and brambles, and
sounding hollow to the tread, was inclosed by a ruinous wall of stones.
Tonoi said it was an almost forgotten burial-place, of great antiquity,
where no one had been interred since the islanders had been Christians.
Sealed up in dry, deep vaults, many a dead heathen was lying here.

Curious to prove the old man’s statement, I was anxious to get a peep
at the catacombs; but hermetically overgrown with vegetation as they
were, no aperture was visible.

Before gaining the level of the valley, we passed by the site of a
village, near a watercourse, long since deserted. There was nothing but
stone walls, and rude dismantled foundations of houses, constructed of
the same material. Large trees and brushwood were growing rankly among
them.

I asked Tonoi how long it was since anyone had lived here. “Me,
tammaree (boy)—plenty kannaker (men) Martair,” he replied. “Now, only
poor pehe kannaka (fishermen) left—me born here.”

Going down the valley, vegetation of every kind presented a different
aspect from that of the high land.

Chief among the trees of the plain on this island is the “Ati,” large
and lofty, with a massive trunk, and broad, laurel-shaped leaves. The
wood is splendid. In Tahiti, I was shown a narrow, polished plank fit
to make a cabinet for a king. Taken from the heart of the tree, it was
of a deep, rich scarlet, traced with yellow veins, and in some places
clouded with hazel.

In the same grove with the regal “AH” you may see the beautiful
flowering “Hotoo”; its pyramid of shining leaves diversified with
numberless small, white blossoms.

Planted with trees as the valley is almost throughout its entire
length, I was astonished to observe so very few which were useful to
the natives: not one in a hundred was a cocoa-nut or bread-fruit tree.

But here Tonoi again enlightened me. In the sanguinary religious
hostilities which ensued upon the conversion of Christianity of the
first Pomaree, a war-party from Tahiti destroyed (by “girdling” the
bark) entire groves of these invaluable trees. For some time afterwards
they stood stark and leafless in the sun; sad monuments of the fate
which befell the inhabitants of the valley.




CHAPTER LVI.
MOSQUITOES


The night following the hunting trip, Long Ghost and myself, after a
valiant defence, had to fly the house on account of the mosquitoes.

And here I cannot avoid relating a story, rife among the natives,
concerning the manner in which these insects were introduced upon the
island.

Some years previous, a whaling captain, touching at an adjoining bay,
got into difficulty with its inhabitants, and at last carried his
complaint before one of the native tribunals; but receiving no
satisfaction, and deeming himself aggrieved, he resolved upon taking
signal revenge. One night, he towed a rotten old water-cask ashore, and
left it in a neglected Taro patch where the ground was warm and moist.
Hence the mosquitoes.

I tried my best to learn the name of this man; and hereby do what I can
to hand it down to posterity. It was Coleman—Nathan Cole-man. The ship
belonged to Nantucket.

When tormented by the mosquitoes, I found much relief in coupling the
word “Coleman” with another of one syllable, and pronouncing them
together energetically.

The doctor suggested a walk to the beach, where there was a long, low
shed tumbling to pieces, but open lengthwise to a current of air which
he thought might keep off the mosquitoes. So thither we went.

The ruin partially sheltered a relic of times gone by, which, a few
days after, we examined with much curiosity. It was an old war-canoe,
crumbling to dust. Being supported by the same rude blocks upon which,
apparently, it had years before been hollowed out, in all probability
it had never been afloat.

Outside, it seemed originally stained of a green colour, which, here
and there, was now changed into a dingy purple. The prow terminated in
a high, blunt beak; both sides were covered with carving; and upon the
stern, was something which Long Ghost maintained to be the arms of the
royal House of Pomaree. The device had an heraldic look,
certainly—being two sharks with the talons of hawks clawing a knot left
projecting from the wood.

The canoe was at least forty feet long, about two wide, and four deep.
The upper part—consisting of narrow planks laced together with cords of
sinnate—had in many places fallen off, and lay decaying upon the
ground. Still, there were ample accommodations left for sleeping; and
in we sprang—the doctor into the bow, and I into the stern. I soon fell
asleep; but waking suddenly, cramped in every joint from my constrained
posture, I thought, for an instant, that I must have been prematurely
screwed down in my coffin.

Presenting my compliments to Long Ghost, I asked how it fared with him.

“Bad enough,” he replied, as he tossed about in the outlandish rubbish
lying in the bottom of our couch. “Pah! how these old mats smell!”

As he continued talking in this exciting strain for some time, I at
last made no reply, having resumed certain mathematical reveries to
induce repose. But finding the multiplication table of no avail, I
summoned up a grayish image of chaos in a sort of sliding fluidity, and
was just falling into a nap on the strength of it, when I heard a
solitary and distinct buzz. The hour of my calamity was at hand. One
blended hum, the creature darted into the canoe like a small swordfish;
and I out of it.

Upon getting into the open air, to my surprise, there was Long Ghost,
fanning himself wildly with an old paddle. He had just made a noiseless
escape from a swarm which had attacked his own end of the canoe.

It was now proposed to try the water; so a small fishing canoe, hauled
up near by, was quickly launched; and paddling a good distance off, we
dropped overboard the native contrivance for an anchor—a heavy stone,
attached to a cable of braided bark. At this part of the island the
encircling reef was close to the shore, leaving the water within
smooth, and extremely shallow.

It was a blessed thought! We knew nothing till sunrise, when the motion
of our aquatic cot awakened us. I looked up, and beheld Zeke wading
toward the shore, and towing us after him by the bark cable. Pointing
to the reef, he told us we had had a narrow escape.

It was true enough; the water-sprites had rolled our stone out of its
noose, and we had floated away.




CHAPTER LVII.
THE SECOND HUNT IN THE MOUNTAINS


Fair dawned, over the hills of Martair, the jocund morning of our hunt.

Everything had been prepared for it overnight; and, when we arrived at
the house, a good breakfast was spread by Shorty: and old Tonoi was
bustling about like an innkeeper. Several of his men, also, were in
attendance to accompany us with calabashes of food; and, in case we met
with any success, to officiate as bearers of burdens on our return.

Apprised, the evening previous, of the meditated sport, the doctor had
announced his willingness to take part therein.

Now, subsequent events made us regard this expedition as a shrewd
device of the Yankee’s. Once get us off on a pleasure trip, and with
what face could we afterward refuse to work? Beside, he enjoyed all the
credit of giving us a holiday. Nor did he omit assuring us that, work
or play, our wages were all the while running on.

A dilapidated old musket of Tonoi’s was borrowed for the doctor. It was
exceedingly short and heavy, with a clumsy lock, which required a
strong finger to pull the trigger. On trying the piece by firing at a
mark, Long Ghost was satisfied that it could not fail of doing
execution: the charge went one way, and he the other.

Upon this, he endeavoured to negotiate an exchange of muskets with
Shorty; but the Cockney was proof against his blandishments; at last,
he intrusted his weapon to one of the natives to carry for him.

Marshalling our forces, we started for the head of the valley; near
which a path ascended to a range of high land, said to be a favourite
resort of the cattle.

Shortly after gaining the heights, a small herd, some way off, was
perceived entering a wood. We hurried on; and, dividing our party, went
in after them at four different points; each white man followed by
several natives.

I soon found myself in a dense covert; and, after looking round, was
just emerging into a clear space, when I heard a report, and a bullet
knocked the bark from a tree near by. The same instant there was a
trampling and crashing; and five bullocks, nearly abreast, broke into
View across the opening, and plunged right toward the spot where myself
and three of the islanders were standing.

They were small, black, vicious-looking creatures; with short, sharp
horns, red nostrils, and eyes like coals of fire. On they came—their
dark woolly heads hanging down.

By this time my island backers were roosting among the trees. Glancing
round, for an instant, to discover a retreat in case of emergency, I
raised my piece, when a voice cried out, from the wood, “Right between
the ’orns, Paul! right between the ’orns!” Down went my barrel in range
with a small white tuft on the forehead of the headmost one; and,
letting him have it, I darted to one side. As I turned again, the five
bullocks shot by like a blast, making the air eddy in their wake.

The Yankee now burst into view, and saluted them in flank. Whereupon,
the fierce little bull with the tufted forehead flirted his long tail
over his buttocks; kicked out with his hind feet, and shot forward a
full length. It was nothing but a graze; and, in an instant, they were
out of sight, the thicket into which they broke rocking overhead, and
marking their progress.

The action over, the heavy artillery came up, in the person of the Long
Doctor with the blunderbuss.

“Where are they?” he cried, out of breath.

“A mile or two h’off, by this time,” replied the Cockney. “Lord, Paul I
you ought to’ve sent an ’ailstone into that little black ’un.”

While excusing my want of skill, as well as I could, Zeke, rushing
forward, suddenly exclaimed, “Creation! what are you ’bout there,
Peter?”

Peter, incensed at our ill luck, and ignorantly imputing it to the
cowardice of our native auxiliaries, was bringing his piece to bear
upon his trembling squire—the musket-carrier—now descending a tree.

Pulling trigger, the bullet went high over his head; and, hopping to
the ground, bellowing like a calf, the fellow ran away as fast as his
heels could carry him. The rest followed us, after this, with fear and
trembling.

After forming our line of march anew, we went on for several hours
without catching a glimpse of the game; the reports of the muskets
having been heard at a great distance. At last, we mounted a craggy
height, to obtain a wide view of the country. Prom this place, we
beheld three cattle quietly browsing in a green opening of a wood
below; the trees shutting them in all round.

A general re-examination of the muskets now took place, followed by a
hasty lunch from the calabashes: we then started. As we descended the
mountainside the cattle were in plain sight until we entered the
forest, when we lost sight of them for a moment; but only to see them
again, as we crept close up to the spot where they grazed.

They were a bull, a cow, and a calf. The cow was lying down in the
shade, by the edge of the wood; the calf, sprawling out before her in
the grass, licking her lips; while old Taurus himself stood close by,
casting a paternal glance at this domestic little scene, and conjugally
elevating his nose in the air.

“Now then,” said Zeke, in a whisper, “let’s take the poor creeturs
while they are huddled together. Crawl along, b’ys; crawl along. Fire
together, mind; and not till I say the word.”

We crept up to the very edge of the open ground, and knelt behind a
clump of bushes; resting our levelled barrels among the branches. The
slight rustling was heard. Taurus turned round, dropped his head to the
ground, and sent forth a low, sullen bellow; then snuffed the air. The
cow rose on her foreknees, pitched forward alarmedly, and stood upon
her legs; while the calf, with ears pricked, got right underneath her.
All three were now grouped, and in an instant would be off.

“I take the bull,” cried our leader; “fire!”

The calf fell like a clod; its dam uttered a cry, and thrust her head
into the thicket; but she turned, and came moaning up to the lifeless
calf, going round and round it, snuffing fiercely with her bleeding
nostrils. A crashing in the wood, and a loud roar, announced the flying
bull.

Soon, another shot was fired, and the cow fell. Leaving some of the
natives to look after the dead cattle, the rest of us hurried on after
the bull; his dreadful bellowing guiding us to the spot where he lay.
Wounded in the shoulder, in his fright and agony he had bounded into
the wood; but when we came up to him, he had sunk to the earth in a
green hollow, thrusting his black muzzle into a pool of his own blood,
and tossing it over his hide in clots.

The Yankee brought his piece to a rest; and, the next instant, the wild
brute sprang into the air, and with his forelegs crouching under him,
fell dead.

Our island friends were now in high spirits; all courage and alacrity.
Old Tonoi thought nothing of taking poor Taurus himself by the horns,
and peering into his glazed eyes.

Our ship knives were at once in request; and, skinning the cattle, we
hung them high up by cords of bark from the boughs of a tree.
Withdrawing into a covert, we there waited for the wild hogs; which,
according to Zeke, would soon make their appearance, lured by the smell
of blood. Presently we heard them coming, in two or three different
directions; and, in a moment, they were tearing the offal to pieces.

As only one shot at these creatures could be relied on, we intended
firing simultaneously; but, somehow or other, the doctor’s piece went
off by itself, and one of the hogs dropped. The others then breaking
into the thicket, the rest of us sprang after them; resolved to have
another shot at all hazards.

The Cockney darted among some bushes; and, a few moments after, we
heard the report of his musket, followed by a quick cry. On running up,
we saw our comrade doing battle with a young devil of a boar, as black
as night, whose snout had been partly torn away. Firing when the game
was in full career, and coming directly toward him, Shorty had been
assailed by the enraged brute; it was now crunching the breech of the
musket, with which he had tried to club it; Shorty holding fast to the
barrel, and fingering his waist for a knife. Being in advance of the
others, I clapped my gun to the boar’s head, and so put an end to the
contest.

Evening now coming on, we set to work loading our carriers. The cattle
were so small that a stout native could walk off with an entire
quarter; brushing through thickets, and descending rocks without an
apparent effort; though, to tell the truth, no white man present could
have done the thing with any ease. As for the wild hogs, none of the
islanders could be induced to carry Shorty’s; some invincible
superstition being connected with its black colour. We were, therefore,
obliged to leave it. The other, a spotted one, being slung by green
thongs to a pole, was marched off with by two young natives.

With our bearers of burdens ahead, we then commenced our return down
the valley. Half-way home, darkness overtook us in the woods; and
torches became necessary. We stopped, and made them of dry palm
branches; and then, sending two lads on in advance for the purpose of
gathering fuel to feed the flambeaux, we continued our journey.

It was a wild sight. The torches, waved aloft, flashed through the
forest; and, where the ground admitted, the islanders went along on a
brisk trot, notwithstanding they bent forward under their loads. Their
naked backs were stained with blood; and occasionally, running by each
other, they raised wild cries which startled the hillsides.




CHAPTER LVIII.
THE HUNTING-FEAST; AND A VISIT TO AFREHITOO


Two bullocks and a boar! No bad trophies of our day’s sport. So by
torchlight we marched into the plantation, the wild hog rocking from
its pole, and the doctor singing an old hunting-song—Tally-ho! the
chorus of which swelled high above the yells of the natives.

We resolved to make a night of it. Kindling a great fire just outside
the dwelling, and hanging one of the heifer’s quarters from a limb of
the banian-tree, everyone was at liberty to cut and broil for himself.
Baskets of roasted bread-fruit, and plenty of taro pudding; bunches of
bananas, and young cocoa-nuts, had also been provided by the natives
against our return.

The fire burned bravely, keeping off the mosquitoes, and making every
man’s face glow like a beaker of Port. The meat had the true wild-game
flavour, not at all impaired by our famous appetites, and a couple of
flasks of white brandy, which Zeke, producing from his secret store,
circulated freely.

There was no end to my long comrade’s spirits. After telling his
stories, and singing his songs, he sprang to his feet, clasped a young
damsel of the grove round the waist, and waltzed over the grass with
her. But there’s no telling all the pranks he played that night. The
natives, who delight in a wag, emphatically pronounced him “maitai.”

It was long after midnight ere we broke up; but when the rest had
retired, Zeke, with the true thrift of a Yankee, salted down what was
left of the meat.

The next day was Sunday; and at my request, Shorty accompanied me to
Afrehitoo—a neighbouring bay, and the seat of a mission, almost
directly opposite Papeetee. In Afrehitoo is a large church and
school-house, both quite dilapidated; and planted amid shrubbery on a
fine knoll, stands a very tasteful cottage, commanding a view across
the channel. In passing, I caught sight of a graceful calico skirt
disappearing from the piazza through a doorway. The place was the
residence of the missionary.

A trim little sail-boat was dancing out at her moorings, a few yards
from the beach.

Straggling over the low lands in the vicinity were several native
huts—untidy enough—but much better every way than most of those in
Tahiti.

We attended service at the church, where we found but a small
congregation; and after what I had seen in Papeetee, nothing very
interesting took place. But the audience had a curious, fidgety look,
which I knew not how to account for until we ascertained that a sermon
with the eighth commandment for a text was being preached.

It seemed that there lived an Englishman in the district, who, like our
friends, the planters, was cultivating Tombez potatoes for the Papeetee
market.

In spite of all his precautions, the natives were in the habit of
making nocturnal forays into his inclosure, and carrying off the
potatoes. One night he fired a fowling-piece, charged with pepper and
salt, at several shadows which he discovered stealing across his
premises. They fled. But it was like seasoning anything else; the
knaves stole again with a greater relish than ever; and the very next
night, he caught a party in the act of roasting a basketful of potatoes
under his own cooking-shed. At last, he stated his grievances to the
missionary; who, for the benefit of his congregation, preached the
sermon we heard.

Now, there were no thieves in Martair; but then, the people of the
valley were bribed to be honest. It was a regular business transaction
between them and the planters. In consideration of so many potatoes “to
them in hand, duly paid,” they were to abstain from all depredations
upon the plantation. Another security against roguery was the permanent
residence upon the premises of their chief, Tonoi.

On our return to Martair in the afternoon, we found the doctor and Zeke
making themselves comfortable. The latter was reclining on the ground,
pipe in mouth, watching the doctor, who, sitting like a Turk, before a
large iron kettle, was slicing potatoes and Indian turnip, and now and
then shattering splinters from a bone; all of which, by turns, were
thrown into the pot. He was making what he called “Bullock broth.”

In gastronomic affairs, my friend was something of an artist; and by
way of improving his knowledge, did nothing the rest of the day but
practise in what might be called Experimental Cookery: broiling and
grilling, and deviling slices of meat, and subjecting them to all sorts
of igneous operations. It was the first fresh beef that either of us
had tasted in more than a year.

“Oh, ye’ll pick up arter a while, Peter,” observed Zeke toward night,
as Long Ghost was turning a great rib over the coals—“what d’ye think,
Paul?”

“He’ll get along, I dare say,” replied I; “he only wants to get those
cheeks of his tanned.” To tell the truth, I was not a little pleased to
see the doctor’s reputation as an invalid fading away so fast;
especially as, on the strength of his being one, he had promised to
have such easy times of it, and very likely, too, at my expense.




CHAPTER LIX.
THE MURPHIES


Dozing in our canoe the next morning about daybreak, we were awakened
by Zeke’s hailing us loudly from the beach.

Upon paddling up, he told us that a canoe had arrived overnight, from
Papeetee, with an order from a ship lying there for a supply of his
potatoes; and as they must be on board the vessel by noon, he wanted us
to assist in bringing them down to his sail-boat.

My long comrade was one of those who, from always thrusting forth the
wrong foot foremost when they rise, or committing some other
indiscretion of the limbs, are more or less crabbed or sullen before
breakfast. It was in vain, therefore, that the Yankee deplored the
urgency of the case which obliged him to call us up thus early:—the
doctor only looked the more glum, and said nothing in reply.

At last, by way of getting up a little enthusiasm for the occasion, the
Yankee exclaimed quite spiritedly, “What d’ye say, then, b’ys, shall we
get at it?”

“Yes, in the devil’s name!” replied the doctor, like a snapping turtle;
and we moved on to the house. Notwithstanding his ungracious answer, he
probably thought that, after the gastronomic performance of the day
previous, it would hardly do to hang back. At the house, we found
Shorty ready with the hoes; and we at once repaired to the farther side
of the inclosure, where the potatoes had yet to be taken out of the
ground.

The rich, tawny soil seemed specially adapted to the crop; the great
yellow murphies rolling out of the hills like eggs from a nest.

My comrade really surprised me by the zeal with which he applied
himself to his hoe. For my own part, exhilarated by the cool breath of
the morning, I worked away like a good fellow. As for Zeke and the
Cockney, they seemed mightily pleased at this evidence of our
willingness to exert ourselves.

It was not long ere all the potatoes were turned out; and then came the
worst of it: they were to be lugged down to the beach, a distance of at
least a quarter of a mile. And there being no such thing as a barrow,
or cart, on the island, there was nothing for it but spinal-marrows and
broad shoulders. Well knowing that this part of the business would be
anything but agreeable, Zeke did his best to put as encouraging a face
upon it as possible; and giving us no time to indulge in desponding
thoughts, gleefully directed our attention to a pile of rude
baskets—made of stout stalks—which had been provided for the occasion.
So, without more ado, we helped ourselves from the heap: and soon we
were all four staggering along under our loads.

The first trip down, we arrived at the beach together: Zeke’s
enthusiastic cries proving irresistible. A trip or two more, however,
and my shoulders began to grate in their sockets; while the doctor’s
tall figure acquired an obvious stoop. Presently, we both threw down
our baskets, protesting we could stand it no longer. But our employers,
bent, as it were, upon getting the work out of us by a silent appeal to
our moral sense, toiled away without pretending to notice us. It was as
much as to say, “There, men, we’ve been boarding and lodging ye for the
last three days; and yesterday ye did nothing earthly but eat; so stand
by now, and look at us working, if ye dare.” Thus driven to it, then,
we resumed our employment. Yet, in spite of all we could do, we lagged
behind Zeke and Shorty, who, breathing hard, and perspiring at every
pore, toiled away without pause or cessation. I almost wickedly wished
that they would load themselves down with one potato too many.

Gasping as I was with my own hamper, I could not, for the life of me,
help laughing at Long Ghost. There he went:—his long neck thrust
forward, his arms twisted behind him to form a shelf for his basket to
rest on; and his stilts of legs every once in a while giving way under
him, as if his knee-joints slipped either way.

“There! I carry no more!” he exclaimed all at once, flinging his
potatoes into the boat, where the Yankee was just then stowing them
away.

“Oh, then,” said Zeke, quite briskly, “I guess you and Paul had better
try the ‘barrel-machine’—come along, I’ll fix ye out in no time”; and,
so saying, he waded ashore, and hurried back to the house, bidding us
follow.

Wondering what upon earth the “barrel-machine” could be, and rather
suspicious of it, we limped after. On arriving at the house, we found
him getting ready a sort of sedan-chair. It was nothing more than an
old barrel suspended by a rope from the middle of a stout oar. Quite an
ingenious contrivance of the Yankee’s; and his proposed arrangement
with regard to mine and the doctor’s shoulders was equally so.

“There now!” said he, when everything was ready, “there’s no
back-breaking about this; you can stand right up under it, you see:
jist try it once”; and he politely rested the blade of the oar on my
comrade’s right shoulder, and the other end on mine, leaving the barrel
between us.

“Jist the thing!” he added, standing off admiringly, while we remained
in this interesting attitude.

There was no help for us; with broken hearts and backs we trudged back
to the field; the doctor all the while saying masses.

Upon starting with the loaded barrel, for a few paces we got along
pretty well, and were constrained to think the idea not a bad one. But
we did not long think so. In less than five minutes we came to a dead
halt, the springing and buckling of the clumsy oar being almost
unendurable.

“Let’s shift ends,” cried the doctor, who did not relish the blade of
the stick, which was cutting into the blade of his shoulder.

At last, by stages short and frequent, we managed to shamble down the
beach, where we again dumped our cargo, in something of a pet.

“Why not make the natives help?” asked Long Ghost, rubbing his
shoulder.

“Natives be dumned!” said the Yankee, “twenty on ’em ain’t worth one
white man. They never was meant to work any, them chaps; and they knows
it, too, for dumned little work any on ’em ever does.”

But, notwithstanding this abuse, Zeke was at last obliged to press a
few of the bipeds into service. “Aramai!” (come here) he shouted to
several, who, reclining on a bank, had hitherto been critical observers
of our proceedings; and, among other things, had been particularly
amused by the performance with the sedan-chair.

After making these fellows load their baskets together, the Yankee
filled his own, and then drove them before him down to the beach.
Probably he had seen the herds of panniered mules driven in this way by
mounted Indians along the great Callao to Lima. The boat at last
loaded, the Yankee, taking with him a couple of natives, at once
hoisted sail, and stood across the channel for Papeetee.

The next morning at breakfast, old Tonoi ran in, and told us that the
voyagers were returning. We hurried down to the beach, and saw the boat
gliding toward us, with a dozing islander at the helm, and Zeke
standing up in the bows, jingling a small bag of silver, the proceeds
of his cargo.




CHAPTER LX.
WHAT THEY THOUGHT OF US IN MARTAIR


Several quiet days now passed away, during which we just worked
sufficiently to sharpen our appetites; the planters leniently exempting
us from any severe toil.

Their desire to retain us became more and more evident; which was not
to be wondered at; for, beside esteeming us from the beginning a couple
of civil, good-natured fellows, who would soon become quite at-home
with them, they were not slow in perceiving that we were far different
from the common run of rovers; and that our society was both
entertaining and instructive to a couple of solitary, illiterate men
like themselves.

In a literary point of view, indeed, they soon regarded us with
emotions of envy and wonder; and the doctor was considered nothing
short of a prodigy. The Cockney found out that he (the doctor) could
read a book upside down, without even so much as spelling the big words
beforehand; and the Yankee, in the twinkling of an eye, received from
him the sum total of several arithmetical items, stated aloud, with the
view of testing the extent of his mathematical lore.

Then, frequently, in discoursing upon men and things, my long comrade
employed such imposing phrases that, upon one occasion, they actually
remained uncovered while he talked.

In short, their favourable opinion of Long Ghost in particular rose
higher and higher every day; and they began to indulge in all manner of
dreams concerning the advantages to be derived from employing so
learned a labourer. Among other projects revealed was that of building
a small craft of some forty tons for the purpose of trading among the
neighbouring islands. With a native crew, we would then take turns
cruising over the tranquil Pacific; touching here and there, as caprice
suggested, and collecting romantic articles of commerce;—beach-de-mer,
the pearl-oyster, arrow-root, ambergris, sandal-wood, cocoa-nut oil,
and edible birdnests.

This South Sea yachting was delightful to think of; and straightway,
the doctor announced his willingness to navigate the future schooner
clear of all shoals and reefs whatsoever. His impudence was audacious.
He enlarged upon the science of navigation; treated us to a
dissertation on Mercator’s Sailing and the Azimuth compass; and went
into an inexplicable explanation of the Lord only knows what plan of
his for infallibly settling the longitude.

Whenever my comrade thus gave the reins to his fine fancy, it was a
treat to listen, and therefore I never interfered; but, with the
planters, sat in mute admiration before him. This apparent
self-abasement on my part must have been considered as truly indicative
of our respective merits; for, to my no small concern, I quickly
perceived that, in the estimate formed of us, Long Ghost began to be
rated far above myself. For aught I knew, indeed, he might have
privately thrown out a hint concerning the difference in our respective
stations aboard the Julia; or else the planters must have considered
him some illustrious individual, for certain inscrutable reasons, going
incog. With this idea of him, his undisguised disinclination for work
became venial; and entertaining such views of extending their business,
they counted more upon his ultimate value to them as a man of science
than as a mere ditcher.

Nor did the humorous doctor forbear to foster an opinion every way so
advantageous to himself; at times, for the sake of the joke, assuming
airs of superiority over myself, which, though laughable enough, were
sometimes annoying.

To tell the plain truth, things at last came to such a pass that I told
him, up and down, that I had no notion to put up with his pretensions;
if he were going to play the gentleman, I was going to follow suit; and
then there would quickly be an explosion.

At this he laughed heartily; and after some mirthful chat, we resolved
upon leaving the valley as soon as we could do so with a proper regard
to politeness.

At supper, therefore, the same evening, the doctor hinted at our
intention.

Though much surprised, and vexed, Zeke moved not a muscle. “Peter,”
said he at last—very gravely—and after mature deliberation, “would you
like to do the cooking? It’s easy work; and you needn’t do anything
else. Paul’s heartier; he can work in the field when it suits him; and
before long, we’ll have ye at something more agreeable:—won’t we,
Shorty?”

Shorty assented.

Doubtless, the proposed arrangement was a snug one; especially the
sinecure for the doctor; but I by no means relished the functions
allotted to myself—they were too indefinite. Nothing final, however,
was agreed upon;—our intention to leave was revealed, and that was
enough for the present. But, as we said nothing further about going,
the Yankee must have concluded that we might yet be induced to remain.
He redoubled his endeavours to make us contented.

It was during this state of affairs that, one morning, before
breakfast, we were set to weeding in a potato-patch; and the planters
being engaged at the house, we were left to ourselves.

Now, though the pulling of weeds was considered by our employers an
easy occupation (for which reason they had assigned it to us), and
although as a garden recreation it may be pleasant enough, for those
who like it—still, long persisted in, the business becomes excessively
irksome.

Nevertheless, we toiled away for some time, until the doctor, who, from
his height, was obliged to stoop at a very acute angle, suddenly sprang
upright; and with one hand propping his spinal column, exclaimed, “Oh,
that one’s joints were but provided with holes to drop a little oil
through!”

Vain as the aspiration was for this proposed improvement upon our
species, I cordially responded thereto; for every vertebra in my spine
was articulating in sympathy.

Presently, the sun rose over the mountains, inducing that deadly
morning languor so fatal to early exertion in a warm climate. We could
stand it no longer; but, shouldering our hoes, moved on to the house,
resolved to impose no more upon the good-nature of the planters by
continuing one moment longer in an occupation so extremely uncongenial.

We freely told them so. Zeke was exceedingly hurt, and said everything
he could think of to alter our determination; but, finding all
unavailing, he very hospitably urged us not to be in any hurry about
leaving; for we might stay with him as guests until we had time to
decide upon our future movements.

We thanked him sincerely; but replied that, the following morning, we
must turn our backs upon the hills of Martair.




CHAPTER LXI.
PREPARING FOR THE JOURNEY


During the remainder of the day we loitered about, talking over our
plans.

The doctor was all eagerness to visit Tamai, a solitary inland village,
standing upon the banks of a considerable lake of the same name, and
embosomed among groves. From Afrehitoo you went to this place by a
lonely pathway leading through the wildest scenery in the world. Much,
too, we had heard concerning the lake itself, which abounded in such
delicious fish that, in former times, angling parties occasionally came
over to it from Papeetee.

Upon its banks, moreover, grew the finest fruit of the islands, and in
their greatest perfection. The “Ve,” or Brazilian plum, here attained
the size of an orange; and the gorgeous “Arheea,” or red apple of
Tahiti, blushed with deeper dyes than in any of the seaward valleys.

Beside all this, in Tamai dwelt the most beautiful and unsophisticated
women in the entire Society group. In short, the village was so remote
from the coast, and had been so much less affected by recent changes
than other places that, in most things, Tahitian life was here seen as
formerly existing in the days of young Otoo, the boy-king, in Cook’s
time.

After obtaining from the planters all the information which was needed,
we decided upon penetrating to the village; and after a temporary
sojourn there, to strike the beach again, and journey round to Taloo, a
harbour on the opposite side of the island.

We at once put ourselves in travelling trim. Just previous to leaving
Tahiti, having found my wardrobe reduced to two suits (frock and
trousers, both much the worse for wear), I had quilted them together
for mutual preservation (after a fashion peculiar to sailors);
engrafting a red frock upon a blue one, and producing thereby a choice
variety in the way of clothing. This was the extent of my wardrobe. Nor
was the doctor by any means better off. His improvidence had at last
driven him to don the nautical garb; but by this time his frock—a light
cotton one—had almost given out, and he had nothing to replace it.
Shorty very generously offered him one which was a little less ragged;
but the alms were proudly refused; Long Ghost preferring to assume the
ancient costume of Tahiti—the “Roora.”

This garment, once worn as a festival dress, is now seldom met with;
but Captain Bob had often shown us one which he kept as an heirloom. It
was a cloak, or mantle, of yellow tappa, precisely similar to the
“poncho” worn by the South-American Spaniards. The head being slipped
through a slit in the middle, the robe hangs about the person in ample
drapery. Tonoi obtained sufficient coarse brown tappa to make a short
mantle of this description; and in five minutes the doctor was
equipped. Zeke, eyeing his toga critically, reminded its proprietor
that there were many streams to ford, and precipices to scale, between
Martair and Tamai; and if he travelled in petticoats, he had better
hold them up.

Besides other deficiencies, we were utterly shoeless. In the free and
easy Pacific, sailors seldom wear shoes; mine had been tossed overboard
the day we met the Trades; and except in one or two tramps ashore, I
had never worn any since. In Martair, they would have been desirable:
but none were to be had. For the expedition we meditated, however, they
were indispensable. Zeke, being the owner of a pair of huge,
dilapidated boots, hanging from a rafter like saddlebags, the doctor
succeeded in exchanging for them a case-knife, the last valuable
article in his possession. For myself, I made sandals from a bullock’s
hide, such as are worn by the Indians in California. They are made in a
minute; the sole, rudely fashioned to the foot, being confined across
the instep by three straps of leather.

Our headgear deserves a passing word. My comrade’s was a brave old
Panama hat, made of grass, almost as fine as threads of silk; and so
elastic that, upon rolling it up, it sprang into perfect shape again.
Set off by the jaunty slouch of this Spanish sombrero, Doctor Long
Ghost, in this and his Eoora, looked like a mendicant grandee.

Nor was my own appearance in an Eastern turban less distinguished. The
way I came to wear it was this. My hat having been knocked overboard a
few days before reaching Papeetee, I was obliged to mount an abominable
wad of parti-coloured worsted—what sailors call a Scotch cap. Everyone
knows the elasticity of knit wool; and this Caledonian head-dress
crowned my temples so effectually that the confined atmosphere
engendered was prejudicial to my curls. In vain I tried to ventilate
the cap: every gash made seemed to heal whole in no time. Then such a
continual chafing as it kept up in a hot sun.

Seeing my dislike to the thing, Kooloo, my worthy friend, prevailed
upon me to bestow it upon him. I did so; hinting that a good boiling
might restore the original brilliancy of the colours.

It was then that I mounted the turban. Taking a new Regatta frock of
the doctor’s, which was of a gay calico, and winding it round my head
in folds, I allowed the sleeves to droop behind—thus forming a good
defence against the sun, though in a shower it was best off. The
pendent sleeves adding much to the effect, the doctor called me the
Bashaw with Two Tails.

Thus arrayed, we were ready for Tamai; in whose green saloons we
counted upon creating no small sensation.




CHAPTER LXII.
TAMAI


Long before sunrise the next morning my sandals were laced on, and the
doctor had vaulted into Zeke’s boots.

Expecting to see us again before we went to Taloo, the planters wished
us a pleasant journey; and, on parting, very generously presented us
with a pound or two of what sailors call “plug” tobacco; telling us to
cut it up into small change; the Virginian weed being the principal
circulating medium on the island.

Tamai, we were told, was not more than three or four leagues distant;
so making allowances for a wild road, a few hours to rest at noon, and
our determination to take the journey leisurely, we counted upon
reaching the shores of the lake some time in the flush of the evening.

For several hours we went on slowly through wood and ravine, and over
hill and precipice, seeing nothing but occasional herds of wild cattle,
and often resting; until we found ourselves, about noon, in the very
heart of the island.

It was a green, cool hollow among the mountains, into which we at last
descended with a bound. The place was gushing with a hundred springs,
and shaded over with great solemn trees, on whose mossy boles the
moisture stood in beads. Strange to say, no traces of the bullocks ever
having been here were revealed. Nor was there a sound to be heard, nor
a bird to be seen, nor any breath of wind stirring the leaves. The
utter solitude and silence were oppressive; and after peering about
under the shades, and seeing nothing but ranks of dark, motionless
trunks, we hurried across the hollow, and ascended a steep mountain
opposite.

Midway up, we rested where the earth had gathered about the roots of
three palms, and thus formed a pleasant lounge, from which we looked
down upon the hollow, now one dark green tuft of woodland at our feet.
Here we brought forth a small calabash of “poee” a parting present from
Tonoi. After eating heartily, we obtained fire by two sticks, and
throwing ourselves back, puffed forth our fatigue in wreaths of smoke.
At last we fell asleep; nor did we waken till the sun had sunk so low
that its rays darted in upon us under the foliage.

Starting up, we then continued our journey; and as we gained the
mountain top—there, to our surprise, lay the lake and village of Tamai.
We had thought it a good league off. Where we stood, the yellow sunset
was still lingering; but over the valley below long shadows were
stealing—the rippling green lake reflecting the houses and trees just
as they stood along its banks. Several small canoes, moored here and
there to posts in the water, were dancing upon the waves; and one
solitary fisherman was paddling over to a grassy point. In front of the
houses, groups of natives were seen; some thrown at full length upon
the ground, and others indolently leaning against the bamboos.

With whoop and halloo, we ran down the hills, the villagers soon
hurrying forth to see who were coming. As we drew near, they gathered
round, all curiosity to know what brought the “karhowrees” into their
quiet country. The doctor contriving to make them understand the purely
social object of our visit, they gave us a true Tahitian welcome;
pointing into their dwellings, and saying they were ours as long as we
chose to remain.

We were struck by the appearance of these people, both men and women;
so much more healthful than the inhabitants of the bays. As for the
young girls, they were more retiring and modest, more tidy in their
dress, and far fresher and more beautiful than the damsels of the
coast. A thousand pities, thought I, that they should bury their charms
in this nook of a valley.

That night we abode in the house of Rartoo, a hospitable old chief. It
was right on the shore of the lake; and at supper we looked out through
a rustling screen of foliage upon the surface of the starlit water.

The next day we rambled about, and found a happy little community,
comparatively free from many deplorable evils to which the rest of
their countrymen are subject. Their time, too, was more occupied. To my
surprise, the manufacture of tappa was going on in several buildings.
European calicoes were seldom seen, and not many articles of foreign
origin of any description.

The people of Tamai were nominally Christians; but being so remote from
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, their religion sat lightly upon them. We
had been told, even, that many heathenish games and dances still
secretly lingered in their valley.

Now the prospect of seeing an old-fashioned “hevar,” or Tahitian reel,
was one of the inducements which brought us here; and so, finding
Rartoo rather liberal in his religious ideas, we disclosed our desire.
At first he demurred; and shrugging his shoulders like a Frenchman,
declared it could not be brought about—was a dangerous matter to
attempt, and might bring all concerned into trouble. But we overcame
all this, convinced him that the thing could be done, and a “hevar,” a
genuine pagan fandango, was arranged for that very night.




CHAPTER LXIII.
A DANCE IN THE VALLEY


There were some ill-natured people—tell-tales—it seemed, in Tamai; and
hence there was a deal of mystery about getting up the dance.

An hour or two before midnight, Rartoo entered the house, and, throwing
robes of tappa over us, bade us follow at a distance behind him; and,
until out of the village, hood our faces. Keenly alive to the
adventure, we obeyed. At last, after taking a wide circuit, we came out
upon the farthest shore of the lake. It was a wide, dewy, space;
lighted up by a full moon, and carpeted with a minute species of fern
growing closely together. It swept right down to the water, showing the
village opposite, glistening among the groves.

Near the trees, on one side of the clear space, was a ruinous pile of
stones many rods in extent; upon which had formerly stood a temple of
Oro. At present, there was nothing but a rude hut, planted on the
lowermost terrace. It seemed to have been used as a “tappa herree,” or
house for making the native cloth.

Here we saw lights gleaming from between the bamboos, and casting long,
rod-like shadows upon the ground without. Voices also were heard. We
went up, and had a peep at the dancers who were getting ready for the
ballet. They were some twenty in number;-waited upon by hideous old
crones, who might have been duennas. Long Ghost proposed to send the
latter packing; but Rartoo said it would never do, and so they were
permitted to remain.

We tried to effect an entrance at the door, which was fastened; but,
after a noisy discussion with one of the old witches within, our guide
became fidgety, and, at last, told us to desist, or we would spoil all.
He then led us off to a distance to await the performance; as the
girls, he said, did not wish to be recognized. He, furthermore, made us
promise to remain where we were until all was over, and the dancers had
retired.

We waited impatiently; and, at last, they came forth. They were arrayed
in short tunics of white tappa; with garlands of flowers on their
heads. Following them were the duennas, who remained clustering about
the house, while the girls advanced a few paces; and, in an instant,
two of them, taller than their companions, were standing, side by side,
in the middle of a ring formed by the clasped hands of the rest. This
movement was made in perfect silence.

Presently the two girls join hands overhead; and, crying out, “Ahloo!
ahloo!” wave them to and fro. Upon which the ring begins to circle
slowly; the dancers moving sideways, with their arms a little drooping.
Soon they quicken their pace; and, at last, fly round and round: bosoms
heaving, hair streaming, flowers dropping, and every sparkling eye
circling in what seemed a line of light.

Meanwhile, the pair within are passing and repassing each other
incessantly. Inclining sideways, so that their long hair falls far
over, they glide this way and that; one foot continually in the air,
and their fingers thrown forth, and twirling in the moonbeams.

“Ahloo! ahloo!” again cry the dance queens; and coming together in the
middle of the ring, they once more lift up the arch, and stand
motionless.

“Ahloo! ahloo!” Every link of the circle is broken; and the girls,
deeply breathing, stand perfectly still. They pant hard and fast a
moment or two; and then, just as the deep flush is dying away from
their faces, slowly recede, all round; thus enlarging the ring.

Again the two leaders wave their hands, when the rest pause; and now,
far apart, stand in the still moonlight like a circle of fairies.
Presently, raising a strange chant, they softly sway themselves,
gradually quickening the movement, until, at length, for a few
passionate moments, with throbbing bosoms and glowing cheeks, they
abandon themselves to all the spirit of the dance, apparently lost to
everything around. But soon subsiding again into the same languid
measure as before, they become motionless; and then, reeling forward on
all sides, their eyes swimming in their heads, join in one wild chorus,
and sink into each other’s arms.

Such is the Lory-Lory, I think they call it; the dance of the
backsliding girls of Tamai.

While it was going on, we had as much as we could do to keep the doctor
from rushing forward and seizing a partner.

They would give us no more “hevars” that night; and Rartoo fairly
dragged us away to a canoe, hauled up on the lake shore; when we
reluctantly embarked, and paddling over to the village, arrived there
in time for a good nap before sunrise.

The next day, the doctor went about trying to hunt up the overnight
dancers. He thought to detect them by their late rising; but never was
man more mistaken; for, on first sallying out, the whole village was
asleep, waking up in concert about an hour after. But, in the course of
the day, he came across several whom he at once charged with taking
part in the “hevar.” There were some prim-looking fellows standing by
(visiting elders from Afrehitoo, perhaps), and the girls looked
embarrassed; but parried the charge most skilfully.

Though soft as doves, in general, the ladies of Tamai are,
nevertheless, flavoured with a slight tincture of what we queerly
enough call the “devil”; and they showed it on the present occasion.
For when the doctor pressed one rather hard, she all at once turned
round upon him, and, giving him a box on the ear, told him to “hanree
perrar!” (be off with himself.)




CHAPTER LXIV.
MYSTERIOUS


There was a little old man of a most hideous aspect living in Tamai,
who, in a coarse mantle of tappa, went about the village, dancing, and
singing, and making faces. He followed us about wherever we went; and,
when unobserved by others, plucked at our garments, making frightful
signs for us to go along with him somewhere, and see something.

It was in vain that we tried to get rid of him. Kicks and cuffs, even,
were at last resorted to; but, though he howled like one possessed, he
would not go away, but still haunted us. At last, we conjured the
natives to rid us of him; but they only laughed; so we were forced to
endure the dispensation as well as we could.

On the fourth night of our visit, returning home late from paying a few
calls through the village, we turned a dark corner of trees, and came
full upon our goblin friend: as usual, chattering, and motioning with
his hands. The doctor, venting a curse, hurried forward; but, from some
impulse or other, I stood my ground, resolved to find out what this
unaccountable object wanted of us. Seeing me pause, he crept close up
to me, peered into my face, and then retreated, beckoning me to follow;
which I did.

In a few moments the village was behind us; and with my guide in
advance, I found myself in the shadow of the heights overlooking the
farther side of the valley. Here my guide paused until I came up with
him; when, side by side, and without speaking, we ascended the hill.

Presently, we came to a wretched hut, barely distinguishable in the
shade cast by the neighbouring trees. Pushing aside a rude sliding
door, held together with thongs, the goblin signed me to enter. Within,
it looked dark as pitch; so I gave him to understand that he must
strike a light, and go in before me. Without replying, he disappeared
in the darkness; and, after groping about, I heard two sticks rubbing
together, and directly saw a spark. A native taper was then lighted,
and I stooped, and entered.

It was a mere kennel. Foul old mats, and broken cocoa-nut shells, and
calabashes were strewn about the floor of earth; and overhead I caught
glimpses of the stars through chinks in the roof. Here and there the
thatch had fallen through, and hung down in wisps.

I now told him to set about what he was going to do, or produce
whatever he had to show without delay. Looking round fearfully, as if
dreading a surprise, he commenced turning over and over the rubbish in
one corner. At last, he clutched a calabash, stained black, and with
the neck broken off; on one side of it was a large hole. Something
seemed to be stuffed away in the vessel; and after a deal of poking at
the aperture, a musty old pair of sailor trousers was drawn forth; and,
holding them up eagerly, he inquired how many pieces of tobacco I would
give for them.

Without replying, I hurried away; the old man chasing me, and shouting
as I ran, until I gained the village. Here I dodged him, and made my
way home, resolved never to disclose so inglorious an adventure.

To no purpose, the next morning, my comrade besought me to enlighten
him; I preserved a mysterious silence.

The occurrence served me a good turn, however, so long as we abode in
Tamai; for the old clothesman never afterwards troubled me; but forever
haunted the doctor, who, in vain, supplicated Heaven to be delivered
from him.




CHAPTER LXV.
THE HEGIRA, OR FLIGHT


“I say, doctor,” cried I, a few days after my adventure with the
goblin, as, in the absence of our host, we were one morning lounging
upon the matting in his dwelling, smoking our reed pipes, “Tamai’s a
thriving place; why not settle down?”

“Faith!” said he, “not a bad idea, Paul. But do you fancy they’ll let
us stay, though?”

“Why, certainly; they would be overjoyed to have a couple of Karhowrees
for townsmen.”

“Gad! you’re right, my pleasant fellow. Ha! ha! I’ll put up a
banana-leaf as a physician from London—deliver lectures on Polynesian
antiquities—teach English in five lessons, of one hour each—establish
power-looms for the manufacture of tappa—lay out a public park in the
middle of the village, and found a festival in honour of Captain Cook!”

“But, surely, not without stopping to take breath,” observed I.

The doctor’s projects, to be sure, were of a rather visionary cast; but
we seriously thought, nevertheless, of prolonging our stay in the
valley for an indefinite period; and, with this understanding, we were
turning over various plans for spending our time pleasantly, when
several women came running into the house, and hurriedly besought us to
heree! heree! (make our escape), crying out something about the
Mickonarees.

Thinking that we were about to be taken up under the act for the
suppression of vagrancy, we flew out of the house, sprang into a canoe
before the door, and paddled with might and main over to the opposite
side of the lake.

Approaching Rartoo’s dwelling was a great crowd, among which we
perceived several natives, who, from their partly European dress, we
were certain did not reside in Tamai.

Plunging into the groves, we thanked our stars that we had thus
narrowly escaped being apprehended as runaway seamen, and marched off
to the beach. This, at least, was what we thought we had escaped.

Having fled the village, we could not think of prowling about its
vicinity, and then returning; in doing so we might be risking our
liberty again. We therefore determined upon journeying back to Martair;
and setting our faces thitherward, we reached the planters’ house about
nightfall. They gave us a cordial reception, and a hearty supper; and
we sat up talking until a late hour.

We now prepared to go round to Taloo, a place from which we were not
far off when at Tamai; but wishing to see as much of the island as we
could, we preferred returning to Martair, and then going round by way
of the beach.

Taloo, the only frequented harbour of Imeeo, lies on the western side
of the island, almost directly over against Martair. Upon one shore of
the bay stands the village of Partoowye, a missionary station. In its
vicinity is an extensive sugar plantation—the best in the South Seas,
perhaps—worked by a person from Sydney.

The patrimonial property of the husband of Pomaree, and every way a
delightful retreat, Partoowye was one of the occasional residences of
the court. But at the time I write of it was permanently fixed there,
the queen having fled thither from Tahiti.

Partoowye, they told us, was by no means the place Papeetee was. Ships
seldom touched, and very few foreigners were living ashore. A solitary
whaler, however, was reported to be lying in the harbour, wooding and
watering, and to be in want of men.

All things considered, I could not help looking upon Taloo as offering
“a splendid opening” for us adventurers. To say nothing of the
facilities presented for going to sea in the whaler, or hiring
ourselves out as day labourers in the sugar plantation, there were
hopes to be entertained of being promoted to some office of high trust
and emolument about the person of her majesty, the queen.

Nor was this expectation altogether Quixotic. In the train of many
Polynesian princes roving whites are frequently found: gentleman
pensioners of state, basking in the tropical sunshine of the court, and
leading the pleasantest lives in the world. Upon islands little visited
by foreigners the first seaman that settles down is generally
domesticated in the family of the head chief or king; where he
frequently discharges the functions of various offices, elsewhere
filled by as many different individuals. As historiographer, for
instance, he gives the natives some account of distant countries; as
commissioner of the arts and sciences, he instructs them in the use of
the jack-knife, and the best way of shaping bits of iron hoop into
spear-heads; and as interpreter to his majesty, he facilitates
intercourse with strangers; besides instructing the people generally in
the uses of the most common English phrases, civil and profane; but
oftener the latter.

These men generally marry well; often—like Hardy of Hannamanoo—into the
Wood royal.

Sometimes they officiate as personal attendant, or First Lord in
Waiting, to the king. At Amboi, one of the Tonga Islands, a vagabond
Welshman bends his knee as cupbearer to his cannibal majesty. He mixes
his morning cup of “arva,” and, with profound genuflections, presents
it in a cocoa-nut bowl, richly carved. Upon another island of the same
group, where it is customary to bestow no small pains in dressing the
hair—frizzing it out by a curious process into an enormous Pope’s
head—an old man-of-war’s-man fills the post of barber to the king. And
as his majesty is not very neat, his mop is exceedingly populous; so
that, when Jack is not engaged in dressing the head intrusted to his
charge, he busies himself in gently titillating it—a sort of skewer
being actually worn about in the patient’s hair for that special
purpose.

Even upon the Sandwich Islands a low rabble of foreigners is kept about
the person of Tammahammaha for the purpose of ministering to his ease
or enjoyment.

Billy Loon, a jolly little negro, tricked out in a soiled blue jacket,
studded all over with rusty bell buttons, and garnished with shabby
gold lace, is the royal drummer and pounder of the tambourine. Joe, a
wooden-legged Portuguese who lost his leg by a whale, is violinist; and
Mordecai, as he is called, a villainous-looking scamp, going about with
his cups and balls in a side pocket, diverts the court with his
jugglery. These idle rascals receive no fixed salary, being altogether
dependent upon the casual bounty of their master. Now and then they run
up a score at the Dance Houses in Honolulu, where the illustrious
Tammahammaha III afterwards calls and settles the bill.

A few years since an auctioneer to his majesty came near being added to
the retinue of state. It seems that he was the first man who had
practised his vocation in the Sandwich Islands; and delighted with the
sport of bidding upon his wares, the king was one of his best
customers. At last he besought the man to leave all and follow him, and
he should be handsomely provided for at court. But the auctioneer
refused; and so the ivory hammer lost the chance of being borne before
him on a velvet cushion when the next king went to be crowned.

But it was not as strolling players, nor as footmen out of employ, that
the doctor and myself looked forward to our approaching introduction to
the court of the Queen of Tahiti. On the contrary, as before hinted, we
expected to swell the appropriations of bread-fruit and cocoa-nuts on
the Civil List by filling some honourable office in her gift.

We were told that, to resist the usurpation of the French, the queen
was rallying about her person all the foreigners she could. Her
partiality for the English and Americans was well known; and this was
an additional ground for our anticipating a favourable reception. Zeke
had informed us, moreover, that by the queen’s counsellors at
Partoowye, a war of aggression against the invaders of Papeetee had
been seriously thought of. Should this prove true, a surgeon’s
commission for the doctor, and a lieutenancy for myself, were certainly
counted upon in our sanguine expectations.

Such, then, were our views, and such our hopes in projecting a trip to
Taloo. But in our most lofty aspirations we by no means lost sight of
any minor matters which might help us to promotion. The doctor had
informed me that he excelled in playing the fiddle. I now suggested
that, as soon as we arrived at Partoowye, we should endeavour to borrow
a violin for him; or if this could not be done, that he should
manufacture some kind of a substitute, and, thus equipped, apply for an
audience of the queen. Her well-known passion for music would at once
secure his admittance; and so, under the most favourable auspices,
bring about our introduction to her notice.

“And who knows,” said my waggish comrade, throwing his head back and
performing an imaginary air by briskly drawing one arm across the
other, “who knows that I may not fiddle myself into her majesty’s good
graces so as to became a sort of Rizzio to the Tahitian princess.”




CHAPTER LXVI.
HOW WE WERE TO GET TO TALOO


The inglorious circumstances of our somewhat premature departure from
Tamai filled the sagacious doctor, and myself, with sundry misgivings
for the future.

Under Zeke’s protection, we were secure from all impertinent
interference in our concerns on the part of the natives. But as
friendless wanderers over the island, we ran the risk of being
apprehended as runaways, and, as such, sent back to Tahiti. The truth
is that the rewards constantly offered for the apprehension of
deserters from ships induce some of the natives to eye all strangers
suspiciously.

A passport was therefore desirable; but such a thing had never been
heard of in Imeeo. At last, Long Ghost suggested that, as the Yankee
was well known and much respected all over the island, we should
endeavour to obtain from him some sort of paper, not only certifying to
our having been in his employ, but also to our not being highwaymen,
kidnappers, nor yet runaway seamen. Even written in English, a paper
like this would answer every purpose; for the unlettered natives,
standing in great awe of the document, would not dare to molest us
until acquainted with its purport. Then, if it came to the worst, we
might repair to the nearest missionary, and have the passport
explained.

Upon informing Zeke of these matters, he seemed highly flattered with
the opinion we entertained of his reputation abroad; and he agreed to
oblige us. The doctor at once offered to furnish him with a draught of
the paper; but he refused, saying he would write it himself. With a
rooster’s quill, therefore, a bit of soiled paper, and a stout heart,
he set to work. Evidently he was not accustomed to composition; for his
literary throes were so violent that the doctor suggested that some
sort of a Caesarian operation might be necessary.

The precious paper was at last finished; and a great curiosity it was.
We were much diverted with his reasons for not dating it.

“In this here dummed eliminate,” he observed, “a feller can’t keep the
run of the months, nohow; cause there’s no seasons; no summer and
winter, to go by. One’s etarnally thinkin’ it’s always July, it’s so
pesky hot.”

A passport provided, we cast about for some means of getting to Taloo.

The island of Imeeo is very nearly surrounded by a regular breakwater
of coral extending within a mile or less of the shore. The smooth canal
within furnishes the best means of communication with the different
settlements; all of which, with the exception of Tamai, are right upon
the water. And so indolent are the Imeeose that they think nothing of
going twenty or thirty miles round the island in a canoe in order to
reach a place not a quarter of that distance by land. But as hinted
before, the fear of the bullocks has something to do with this.

The idea of journeying in a canoe struck our fancy quite pleasantly;
and we at once set about chartering one, if possible. But none could we
obtain. For not only did we have nothing to pay for hiring one, but we
could not expect to have it loaned; inasmuch as the good-natured owner
would, in all probability, have to walk along the beach as we paddled
in order to bring back his property when we had no further use for it.

At last, it was decided to commence our journey on foot; trusting that
we would soon fall in with a canoe going our way, in which we might
take passage.

The planters said we would find no beaten path: all we had to do was to
follow the beach; and however inviting it might look inland, on no
account must we stray from it. In short, the longest way round was the
nearest way to Taloo. At intervals, there were little hamlets along the
shore, besides lonely fishermen’s huts here and there, where we could
get plenty to eat without pay; so there was no necessity to lay in any
store.

Intending to be off before sunrise the next morning, so as to have the
benefit of the coolest part of the day, we bade our kind hosts farewell
overnight; and then, repairing to the beach, we launched our floating
pallet, and slept away merrily till dawn.




CHAPTER LXVII.
THE JOURNEY ROUND THE BEACH


It was on the fourth day of the first month of the Hegira, or flight
from Tamai (we now reckoned our time thus), that, rising bright and
early, we were up and away out of the valley of Martair before the
fishermen even were stirring.

It was the earliest dawn. The morning only showed itself along the
lower edge of a bank of purple clouds pierced by the misty peaks of
Tahiti. The tropical day seemed too languid to rise. Sometimes,
starting fitfully, it decked the clouds with faint edgings of pink and
gray, which, fading away, left all dim again. Anon, it threw out thin,
pale rays, growing lighter and lighter, until at last, the golden
morning sprang out of the East with a bound—darting its bright beams
hither and thither, higher and higher, and sending them, broadcast,
over the face of the heavens.

All balmy from the groves of Tahiti came an indolent air, cooled by its
transit over the waters; and grateful underfoot was the damp and
slightly yielding beach, from which the waves seemed just retired.

The doctor was in famous spirits; removing his Koora, he went splashing
into the sea; and, after swimming a few yards, waded ashore, hopping,
skipping, and jumping along the beach; but very careful to cut all his
capers in the direction of our journey.

Say what they will of the glowing independence one feels in the saddle,
give me the first morning flush of your cheery pedestrian!

Thus exhilarated, we went on, as light-hearted and care-free as we
could wish.

And here I cannot refrain from lauding the very superior inducements
which most intertropical countries afford, not only to mere rovers like
ourselves, but to penniless people generally. In these genial regions
one’s wants are naturally diminished; and those which remain are easily
gratified; fuel, house-shelter, and, if you please, clothing, may be
entirely dispensed with.

How different our hard northern latitudes! Alas! the lot of a “poor
devil,” twenty degrees north of the tropic of Cancer, is indeed
pitiable.

At last, the beach contracted to hardly a yard’s width, and the dense
thicket almost dipped into the sea. In place of the smooth sand, too,
we had sharp fragments of broken coral, which made travelling
exceedingly unpleasant. “Lord! my foot!” roared the doctor, fetching it
up for inspection, with a galvanic fling of the limb. A sharp splinter
had thrust itself into the flesh through a hole in his boot. My sandals
were worse yet; their soles taking a sort of fossil impression of
everything trod upon.

Turning round a bold sweep of the beach, we came upon a piece of fine,
open ground, with a fisherman’s dwelling in the distance, crowning a
knoll which rolled off into the water.

The hut proved to be a low, rude erection, very recently thrown up; for
the bamboos were still green as grass, and the thatching fresh and
fragrant as meadow hay. It was open upon three sides; so that, upon
drawing near, the domestic arrangements within were in plain sight. No
one was stirring; and nothing was to be seen but a clumsy old chest of
native workmanship, a few calabashes, and bundles of tappa hanging
against a post; and a heap of something, we knew not what, in a dark
corner. Upon close inspection, the doctor discovered it to be a loving
old couple, locked in each other’s arms, and rolled together in a tappa
mantle.

“Halloa! Darby!” he cried, shaking the one with a beard. But Darby
heeded him not; though Joan, a wrinkled old body, started up in
affright, and yelled aloud. Neither of us attempting to gag her, she
presently became quiet; and, after staring hard and asking some
unintelligible questions, she proceeded to rouse her still slumbering
mate.

What ailed him we could not tell; but there was no waking him. Equally
in vain were all his dear spouse’s cuffs, pinches, and other
endearments; he lay like a log, face up, snoring away like a cavalry
trumpeter.

“Here, my good woman,” said Long Ghost, “just let me try”; and, taking
the patient right by his nose, he so lifted him bodily into a sitting
position, and held him there until his eyes opened. When this event
came to pass, Darby looked round like one stupefied; and then,
springing to his feet, backed away into a corner, from which place we
became the objects of his earnest and respectful attention.

“Permit me, my dear Darby, to introduce to you my esteemed friend and
comrade, Paul,” said the doctor, gallanting me up with all the grimace
and flourish imaginable. Upon this, Darby began to recover his
faculties, and surprised us not a little by talking a few words of
English. So far as could be understood, they were expressive of his
having been aware that there were two “karhowrees” in the
neighbourhood; that he was glad to see us, and would have something for
us to eat in no time.

How he came by his English was explained to us before we left. Some
time previous, he had been a denizen of Papeetee, where the native
language is broidered over with the most classic sailor phrases. He
seemed to be quite proud of his residence there; and alluded to it in
the same significant way in which a provincial informs you that in his
time he has resided in the capital. The old fellow was disposed to be
garrulous; but being sharp-set, we told him to get breakfast; after
which we would hear his anecdotes. While employed among the calabashes,
the strange, antiquated fondness between these old semi-savages was
really amusing. I made no doubt that they were saying to each other,
“yes, my love”—“no, my life,” just in the same way that some young
couples do, at home.

They gave us a hearty meal; and while we were discussing its merits,
they assured us, over and over again, that they expected nothing in
return for their attentions; more: we were at liberty to stay as long
as we pleased; and as long as we did stay, their house and everything
they had was no longer theirs, but ours; still more: they themselves
were our slaves—the old lady, to a degree that was altogether
superfluous. This, now, is Tahitian hospitality! Self-immolation upon
one’s own hearthstone for the benefit of the guest.

The Polynesians carry their hospitality to an amazing extent. Let a
native of Waiurar, the westernmost part of Tahiti, make his appearance
as a traveller at Partoowye, the most easterly village of Imeeo; though
a perfect stranger, the inhabitants on all sides accost him at their
doorways, inviting him to enter, and make himself at home. But the
traveller passes on, examining every house attentively; until, at last,
he pauses before one which suits him, and then exclaiming, “ah, eda
maitai” (this one will do, I think), he steps in, and makes himself
perfectly at ease; flinging himself upon the mats, and very probably
calling for a nice young cocoa-nut, and a piece of toasted breadfruit,
sliced thin, and done brown.

Curious to relate, however, should a stranger carrying it thus bravely
be afterwards discovered to be without a house of his own, why, he may
thenceforth go a-begging for his lodgings. The “karhowrees,” or white
men, are exceptions to this rule. Thus it is precisely as in civilized
countries, where those who have houses and lands are incessantly bored
to death with invitations to come and live in other people’s houses;
while many a poor gentleman who inks the seams of his coat, and to whom
the like invitation would be really acceptable, may go and sue for it.
But to the credit of the ancient Tahitians, it should here be observed
that this blemish upon their hospitality is only of recent origin, and
was wholly unknown in old times. So told me, Captain Bob.

In Polynesia it is esteemed “a great hit” if a man succeed in marrying
into a family to which the best part of the community is related
(Heaven knows it is otherwise with us). The reason is that, when he
goes a-travelling, the greater number of houses are the more completely
at his service.

Receiving a paternal benediction from old Darby and Joan, we continued
our journey; resolved to stop at the very next place of attraction
which offered.

Nor did we long stroll for it. A fine walk along a beach of shells, and
we came to a spot where, trees here and there, the land was all meadow,
sloping away to the water, which stirred a sedgy growth of reeds
bordering its margin. Close by was a little cove, walled in with coral,
where a fleet of canoes was dancing up and down. A few paces distant,
on a natural terrace overlooking the sea, were several native
dwellings, newly thatched, and peeping into view out of the foliage
like summer-houses.

As we drew near, forth came a burst of voices, and, presently, three
gay girls, overflowing with life, health, and youth, and full of
spirits and mischief. One was arrayed in a flaunting robe of calico;
and her long black hair was braided behind in two immense tresses,
joined together at the ends, and wreathed with the green tendrils of a
vine. From her self-possessed and forward air, I fancied she might be
some young lady from Papeetee on a visit to her country relations. Her
companions wore mere slips of cotton cloth; their hair was dishevelled;
and though very pretty, they betrayed the reserve and embarrassment
characteristic of the provinces.

The little gipsy first mentioned ran up to me with great cordiality;
and, giving the Tahitian salutation, opened upon me such a fire of
questions that there was no understanding, much less answering them.
But our hearty welcome to Loohooloo, as she called the hamlet, was made
plain enough. Meanwhile, Doctor Long Ghost gallantly presented an arm
to each of the other young ladies; which, at first, they knew not what
to make of; but at last, taking it for some kind of joke, accepted the
civility.

The names of these three damsels were at once made known by themselves:
and being so exceedingly romantic, I cannot forbear particularizing
them. Upon my comrade’s arms, then, were hanging Night and Morning, in
the persons of Farnowar, or the Day-Born, and Earnoopoo, or the
Night-Born. She with the tresses was very appropriately styled
Marhar-Rarrar, the Wakeful, or Bright-Eyed.

By this time, the houses were emptied of the rest of their inmates—a
few old men and women, and several strapping young fellows rubbing
their eyes and yawning. All crowded round, putting questions as to
whence we came. Upon being informed of our acquaintance with Zeke, they
were delighted; and one of them recognized the boots worn by the
doctor. “Keekee (Zeke) maitai,” they cried, “nuee nuee hanna hanna
portarto”—(makes plenty of potatoes).

There was now a little friendly altercation as to who should have the
honour of entertaining the strangers. At last, a tall old gentleman, by
name Marharvai, with a bald head and white beard, took us each by the
hand, and led us into his dwelling. Once inside, Marharvai, pointing
about with his staff, was so obsequious in assuring us that his house
was ours that Long Ghost suggested he might as well hand over the deed.

It was drawing near noon; so after a light lunch of roasted breadfruit,
a few whiffs of a pipe, and some lively chatting, our host admonished
the company to lie down, and take the everlasting siesta. We complied;
and had a social nap all round.




CHAPTER LXVIII.
A DINNER-PARTY IN IMEEO


It was just in the middle of the merry, mellow afternoon that they
ushered us to dinner, underneath a green shelter of palm boughs; open
all round, and so low at the eaves that we stooped to enter.

Within, the ground was strewn over with aromatic ferns—called
“nahee”—freshly gathered; which, stirred underfoot, diffused the
sweetest odour. On one side was a row of yellow mats, inwrought with
fibres of bark stained a bright red. Here, seated after the fashion of
the Turk, we looked out, over a verdant bank, upon the mild, blue,
endless Pacific. So far round had we skirted the island that the view
of Tahiti was now intercepted.

Upon the ferns before us were laid several layers of broad, thick
“pooroo” leaves; lapping over, one upon the other. And upon these were
placed, side by side, newly-plucked banana leaves, at least two yards
in length, and very wide; the stalks were withdrawn so as to make them
lie flat. This green cloth was set out and garnished in the manner
following:—

First, a number of “pooroo” leaves, by way of plates, were ranged along
on one side; and by each was a rustic nut-bowl, half-filled with
sea-water, and a Tahitian roll, or small bread-fruit, roasted brown. An
immense flat calabash, placed in the centre, was heaped up with
numberless small packages of moist, steaming leaves: in each was a
small fish, baked in the earth, and done to a turn. This pyramid of a
dish was flanked on either side by an ornamental calabash. One was
brimming with the golden-hued “poee,” or pudding, made from the red
plantain of the mountains: the other was stacked up with cakes of the
Indian turnip, previously macerated in a mortar, kneaded with the milk
of the cocoa-nut, and then baked. In the spaces between the three
dishes were piled young cocoa-nuts, stripped of their husks. Their eyes
had been opened and enlarged; so that each was a ready-charged goblet.

There was a sort of side-cloth in one corner, upon which, in bright,
buff jackets, lay the fattest of bananas; “avees,” red-ripe: guavas
with the shadows of their crimson pulp flushing through a transparent
skin, and almost coming and going there like blushes; oranges, tinged,
here and there, berry-brown; and great, jolly melons, which rolled
about in very portliness. Such a heap! All ruddy, ripe, and
round—bursting with the good cheer of the tropical soil from which they
sprang!

“A land of orchards!” cried the doctor, in a rapture; and he snatched a
morsel from a sort of fruit of which gentlemen of the sanguine
temperament are remarkably fond; namely, the ripe cherry lips of Misa
Day-Born, who stood looking on.

Marharvai allotted seats to his guests; and the meal began. Thinking
that his hospitality needed some acknowledgment, I rose, and pledged
him in the vegetable wine of the cocoa-nut; merely repeating the
ordinary salutation, “Yar onor boyoee.” Sensible that some compliment,
after the fashion of white men, was paid him, with a smile, and a
courteous flourish of the hand, he bade me be seated. No people,
however refined, are more easy and graceful in their manners than the
Imeeose.

The doctor, sitting next our host, now came under his special
protection. Laying before his guest one of the packages of fish,
Marharvai opened it; and commended its contents to his particular
regards. But my comrade was one of those who, on convivial occasions,
can always take care of themselves. He ate an indefinite number of
“Pee-hee Lee Lees” (small fish), his own and next neighbour’s
bread-fruit; and helped himself, to right and left, with all the ease
of an accomplished diner-out.

“Paul,” said he, at last, “you don’t seem to be getting along; why
don’t you try the pepper sauce?” and, by way of example, he steeped a
morsel of food into his nutful of sea-water. On following suit, I found
it quite piquant, though rather bitter; but, on the whole, a capital
substitute for salt. The Imeeose invariably use sea-water in this way,
deeming it quite a treat; and considering that their country is
surrounded by an ocean of catsup, the luxury cannot be deemed an
expensive one.

The fish were delicious; the manner of cooking them in the ground
preserving all the juices, and rendering them exceedingly sweet and
tender. The plantain pudding was almost cloying; the cakes of Indian
turnip, quite palatable; and the roasted bread-fruit, crisp as toast.

During the meal, a native lad walked round and round the party,
carrying a long staff of bamboo. This he occasionally tapped upon the
cloth, before each guest; when a white clotted substance dropped forth,
with a savour not unlike that of a curd. This proved to be “Lownee,” an
excellent relish, prepared from the grated meat of ripe cocoa-nuts,
moistened with cocoa-nut milk and salt water, and kept perfectly tight
until a little past the saccharine stage of fermentation.

Throughout the repast there was much lively chatting among the
islanders, in which their conversational powers quite exceeded ours.
The young ladies, too, showed themselves very expert in the use of
their tongues, and contributed much to the gaiety which prevailed.

Nor did these lively nymphs suffer the meal to languish; for upon the
doctor’s throwing himself back, with an air of much satisfaction, they
sprang to their feet, and pelted him with oranges and guavas. This, at
last, put an end to the entertainment.

By a hundred whimsical oddities, my long friend became a great
favourite with these people; and they bestowed upon him a long, comical
title, expressive of his lank figure and Koora combined. The latter, by
the bye, never failed to excite the remark of everybody we encountered.

The giving of nicknames is quite a passion with the people of Tahiti
and Imeeo. No one with any peculiarity, whether of person or temper, is
exempt; not even strangers.

A pompous captain of a man-of-war, visiting Tahiti for the second time,
discovered that, among the natives, he went by the dignified title of
“Atee Poee”—literally, Poee Head, or Pudding Head. Nor is the highest
rank among themselves any protection. The first husband of the present
queen was commonly known in the court circles as “Pot Belly.” He
carried the greater part of his person before him, to be sure; and so
did the gentlemanly George IV.—but what a title for a king consort!

Even “Pomaree” itself, the royal patronymic, was, originally, a mere
nickname; and literally signifies, one talking through his nose. The
first monarch of that name, being on a war party, and sleeping
overnight among the mountains, awoke one morning with a cold in his
head; and some wag of a courtier had no more manners than to vulgarize
him thus.

How different from the volatile Polynesian in this, as in all other
respects, is our grave and decorous North American Indian. While the
former bestows a name in accordance with some humorous or ignoble
trait, the latter seizes upon what is deemed the most exalted or
warlike: and hence, among the red tribes, we have the truly patrician
appellations of “White Eagles,” “Young Oaks,” “Fiery Eyes,” and “Bended
Bows.”




CHAPTER LXIX.
THE COCOA-PALM


While the doctor and the natives were taking a digestive nap after
dinner, I strolled forth to have a peep at the country which could
produce so generous a meal.

To my surprise, a fine strip of land in the vicinity of the hamlet, and
protected seaward by a grove of cocoa-nut and bread-fruit trees, was
under high cultivation. Sweet potatoes, Indian turnips, and yams were
growing; also melons, a few pine-apples, and other fruits. Still more
pleasing was the sight of young bread-fruit and cocoa-nut trees set out
with great care, as if, for once, the improvident Polynesian had
thought of his posterity. But this was the only instance of native
thrift which ever came under my observation. For, in all my rambles
over Tahiti and Imeeo, nothing so much struck me as the comparative
scarcity of these trees in many places where they ought to abound.
Entire valleys, like Martair, of inexhaustible fertility are abandoned
to all the rankness of untamed vegetation. Alluvial flats bordering the
sea, and watered by streams from the mountains, are over-grown with a
wild, scrub guava-bush, introduced by foreigners, and which spreads
with such fatal rapidity that the natives, standing still while it
grows, anticipate its covering the entire island. Even tracts of clear
land, which, with so little pains, might be made to wave with orchards,
lie wholly neglected.

When I considered their unequalled soil and climate, thus unaccountably
slighted, I often turned in amazement upon the natives about Papeetee;
some of whom all but starve in their gardens run to waste. Upon other
islands which I have visited, of similar fertility, and wholly
unreclaimed from their first-discovered condition, no spectacle of this
sort was presented.

The high estimation in which many of their fruit-trees are held by the
Tahitians and Imeeose—their beauty in the landscape—their manifold
uses, and the facility with which they are propagated, are
considerations which render the remissness alluded to still more
unaccountable. The cocoa-palm is as an example; a tree by far the most
important production of Nature in the Tropics. To the Polynesians it is
emphatically the Tree of Life; transcending even the bread-fruit in the
multifarious uses to which it is applied.

Its very aspect is imposing. Asserting its supremacy by an erect and
lofty bearing, it may be said to compare with other trees as man with
inferior creatures.

The blessings it confers are incalculable. Year after year, the
islander reposes beneath its shade, both eating and drinking of its
fruit; he thatches his hut with its boughs, and weaves them into
baskets to carry his food; he cools himself with a fan platted from the
young leaflets, and shields his head from the sun by a bonnet of the
leaves; sometimes he clothes himself with the cloth-like substance
which wraps round the base of the stalks, whose elastic rods, strung
with filberts, are used as a taper; the larger nuts, thinned and
polished, furnish him with a beautiful goblet: the smaller ones, with
bowls for his pipes; the dry husks kindle his fires; their fibres are
twisted into fishing-lines and cords for his canoes; he heals his
wounds with a balsam compounded from the juice of the nut; and with the
oil extracted from its meat embalms the bodies of the dead.

The noble trunk itself is far from being valueless. Sawn into posts, it
upholds the islander’s dwelling; converted into charcoal, it cooks his
food; and supported on blocks of stone, rails in his lands. He impels
his canoe through the water with a paddle of the wood, and goes to
battle with clubs and spears of the same hard material.

In pagan Tahiti a cocoa-nut branch was the symbol of regal authority.
Laid upon the sacrifice in the temple, it made the offering sacred; and
with it the priests chastised and put to flight the evil spirits which
assailed them. The supreme majesty of Oro, the great god of their
mythology, was declared in the cocoa-nut log from which his image was
rudely carved. Upon one of the Tonga Islands, there stands a living
tree revered itself as a deity. Even upon the Sandwich Islands, the
cocoa-palm retains all its ancient reputation; the people there having
thought of adopting it as the national emblem.

The cocoa-nut is planted as follows: Selecting a suitable place, you
drop into the ground a fully ripe nut, and leave it. In a few days, a
thin, lance-like shoot forces itself through a minute hole in the
shell, pierces the husk, and soon unfolds three pale-green leaves in
the air; while originating, in the same soft white sponge which now
completely fills the nut, a pair of fibrous roots, pushing away the
stoppers which close two holes in an opposite direction, penetrate the
shell, and strike vertically into the ground. A day or two more, and
the shell and husk, which, in the last and germinating stage of the
nut, are so hard that a knife will scarcely make any impression,
spontaneously burst by some force within; and, henceforth, the hardy
young plant thrives apace; and needing no culture, pruning, or
attention of any sort, rapidly advances to maturity. In four or five
years it bears; in twice as many more, it begins to lift its head among
the groves, where, waxing strong, it flourishes for near a century.

Thus, as some voyager has said, the man who but drops one of these nuts
into the ground may be said to confer a greater and more certain
benefit upon himself and posterity than many a life’s toil in less
genial climes.

The fruitfulness of the tree is remarkable. As long as it lives it
bears, and without intermission. Two hundred nuts, besides innumerable
white blossoms of others, may be seen upon it at one time; and though a
whole year is required to bring any one of them to the germinating
point, no two, perhaps, are at one time in precisely the same stage of
growth.

The tree delights in a maritime situation. In its greatest perfection,
it is perhaps found right on the seashore, where its roots are actually
washed. But such instances are only met with upon islands where the
swell of the sea is prevented from breaking on the beach by an
encircling reef. No saline flavour is perceptible in the nut produced
in such a place. Although it bears in any soil, whether upland or
bottom, it does not flourish vigorously inland; and I have frequently
observed that, when met with far up the valley, its tall stem inclines
seaward, as if pining after a more genial region.

It is a curious fact that if you deprive the cocoa-nut tree of the
verdant tuft at its head, it dies at once; and if allowed to stand
thus, the trunk, which, when alive, is encased in so hard a bark as to
be almost impervious to a bullet, moulders away, and, in an incredibly
short period, becomes dust. This is, perhaps, partly owing to the
peculiar constitution of the trunk, a mere cylinder of minute hollow
reeds, closely packed, and very hard; but, when exposed at top,
peculiarly fitted to convey moisture and decay through the entire stem.

The finest orchard of cocoa-palms I know, and the only plantation of
them I ever saw at the islands, is one that stands right upon the
southern shore of Papeetee Bay. They were set out by the first Pomaree,
almost half a century ago; and the soil being especially adapted to
their growth, the noble trees now form a magnificent grove, nearly a
mile in extent. No other plant, scarcely a bush, is to be seen within
its precincts. The Broom Road passes through its entire length.

At noonday, this grove is one of the most beautiful, serene, witching
places that ever was seen. High overhead are ranges of green rustling
arches; through which the sun’s rays come down to you in sparkles. You
seem to be wandering through illimitable halls of pillars; everywhere
you catch glimpses of stately aisles, intersecting each other at all
points. A strange silence, too, reigns far and near; the air flushed
with the mellow stillness of a sunset.

But after the long morning calms, the sea-breeze comes in; and creeping
over the tops of these thousand trees, they nod their plumes. Soon the
breeze freshens; and you hear the branches brushing against each other;
and the flexible trunks begin to sway. Toward evening the whole grove
is rocking to and fro; and the traveller on the Broom Road is startled
by the frequent falling of the nuts, snapped from their brittle stems.
They come flying through the air, ringing like jugglers’ balls; and
often bound along the ground for many rods.




CHAPTER LXX.
LIFE AT LOOHOOLOO


Finding the society at Loohooloo very pleasant, the young ladies, in
particular, being extremely sociable; and, moreover, in love with the
famous good cheer of old Marharvai, we acquiesced in an invitation of
his to tarry a few days longer. We might then, he said, join a small
canoe party which was going to a place a league or two distant. So
averse to all exertion are these people that they really thought the
prospect of thus getting rid of a few miles’ walking would prevail with
us, even if there were no other inducement.

The people of the hamlet, as we soon discovered, formed a snug little
community of cousins; of which our host seemed the head. Marharvai, in
truth, was a petty chief who owned the neighbouring lands. And as the
wealthy, in most cases, rejoice in a numerous kindred, the family
footing upon which everybody visited him was, perhaps, ascribable to
the fact of his being the lord of the manor. Like Captain Bob, he was,
in some things, a gentleman of the old school—a stickler for the
customs of a past and pagan age.

Nowhere else, except in Tamai, did we find the manners of the natives
less vitiated by recent changes. The old-fashioned Tahitian dinner they
gave us on the day of our arrival was a fair sample of their general
mode of living.

Our time passed delightfully. The doctor went his way, and I mine. With
a pleasant companion, he was forever strolling inland, ostensibly to
collect botanical specimens; while I, for the most part, kept near the
sea; sometimes taking the girls on an aquatic excursion in a canoe.

Often we went fishing; not dozing over stupid hooks and lines, but
leaping right into the water, and chasing our prey over the coral
rocks, spear in hand.

Spearing fish is glorious sport. The Imeeose, all round the island,
catch them in no other way. The smooth shallows between the reef and
the shore, and, at low water, the reef itself, being admirably adapted
to this mode of capturing them. At almost any time of the day—save ever
the sacred hour of noon—you may see the fish-hunters pursuing their
sport; with loud halloos, brandishing their spears, and splashing
through the water in all directions. Sometimes a solitary native is
seen, far out upon a lonely shallow, wading slowly along, with eye
intent and poised spear.

But the best sport of all is going out upon the great reef itself by
torch-light. The natives follow this recreation with as much spirit as
a gentleman of England does the chase; and take full as much delight in
it.

The torch is nothing more than a bunch of dry reeds, bound firmly
together: the spear, a long, light pole, with an iron head, on one side
barbed.

I shall never forget the night that old Marharvai and the rest of us,
paddling off to the reef, leaped at midnight upon the coral ledges with
waving torches and spears. We were more than a mile from the land; the
sullen ocean, thundering upon the outside of the rocks, dashed the
spray in our faces, almost extinguishing the flambeaux; and, far as the
eye could reach, the darkness of sky and water was streaked with a
long, misty line of foam, marking the course of the coral barrier. The
wild fishermen, flourishing their weapons, and yelling like so many
demons to scare their prey, sprang from ledge to ledge, and sometimes
darted their spears in the very midst of the breakers.

But fish-spearing was not the only sport we had at Loohooloo. Right on
the beach was a mighty old cocoa-nut tree, the roots of which had been
underwashed by the waves so that the trunk inclined far over its base.
From the tuft of the tree a stout cord of bark depended, the end of
which swept the water several yards from the shore. This was a Tahitian
swing. A native lad seizes hold of the cord, and, after swinging to and
fro quite leisurely, all at once sends himself fifty or sixty feet from
the water, rushing through the air like a rocket. I doubt whether any
of our rope-dancers would attempt the feat. For my own part, I had
neither head nor heart for it; so, after sending a lad aloft with an
additional cord, by way of security, I constructed a large basket of
green boughs, in which I and some particular friends of mine used to
swing over sea and land by the hour.




CHAPTER LXXI.
WE START FOR TALOO


Bright was the morning, and brighter still the smiles of the young
ladies who accompanied us, when we sprang into a sort of family
canoe—wide and roomy—and bade adieu to the hospitable Marharvai and his
tenantry. As we paddled away, they stood upon the beach, waving their
hands, and crying out, “aroha! aroha!” (farewell! farewell!) as long as
we were within hearing.

Very sad at parting with them, we endeavoured, nevertheless, to console
ourselves in the society of our fellow-passengers. Among these were two
old ladies; but as they said nothing to us, we will say nothing about
them; nor anything about the old men who managed the canoe. But of the
three mischievous, dark-eyed young witches who lounged in the stern of
that comfortable old island gondola, I have a great deal to say.

In the first place, one of them was Marhar-Rarrar, the Bright-Eyed;
and, in the second place, neither she nor the romps, her companions,
ever dreamed of taking the voyage until the doctor and myself announced
our intention; their going along was nothing more than a madcap frolic;
in short, they were a parcel of wicked hoydens, bent on mischief, who
laughed in your face when you looked sentimental, and only tolerated
your company when making merry at your expense.

Something or other about us was perpetually awaking their mirth.
Attributing this to his own remarkable figure, the doctor increased
their enjoyment by assuming the part of a Merry Andrew. Yet his cap and
bells never jingled but to some tune; and while playing the Tom-fool, I
more than suspected that he was trying to play the rake. At home, it is
deemed auspicious to go a-wooing in epaulets; but among the
Polynesians, your best dress in courting is motley.

A fresh breeze springing up, we set our sail of matting, and glided
along as tranquilly as if floating upon an inland stream; the white
reef on one hand, and the green shore on the other.

Soon, as we turned a headland, we encountered another canoe, paddling
with might and main in an opposite direction; the strangers shouting to
each other, and a tall fellow in the bow dancing up and down like a
crazy man. They shot by us like an arrow, though our fellow-voyagers
shouted again and again for them to cease paddling.

According to the natives, this was a kind of royal mail-canoe, carrying
a message from the queen to her friends in a distant part of the
island.

Passing several shady bowers which looked quite inviting, we proposed
touching, and diversifying the monotony of a sea-voyage by a stroll
ashore. So, forcing our canoe among the bushes, behind a decayed palm
lying partly in the water, we left the old folks to take a nap in the
shade, and gallanted the others among the trees, which were here
trellised with vines and creeping shrubs.

In the early part of the afternoon, we drew near the place to which the
party were going. It was a solitary house inhabited by four or five old
women, who, when we entered, were gathered in a circle about the mats,
eating poee from a cracked calabash. They seemed delighted at seeing
our companions, but rather drew up when introduced to ourselves. Eyeing
us distrustfully, they whispered to know who we were. The answers they
received were not satisfactory; for they treated us with marked
coolness and reserve, and seemed desirous of breaking off our
acquaintance with the girls. Unwilling, therefore, to stay where our
company was disagreeable, we resolved to depart without even eating a
meal.

Informed of this, Marhar-Rarrar and her companions evinced the most
lively concern; and equally unmindful of their former spirits, and the
remonstrances of the old ladies, broke forth into sobs and lamentations
which were not to be withstood. We agreed, therefore, to tarry until
they left for home; which would be at the “Aheharar,” or Falling of the
Sun; in other words, at sunset.

When the hour arrived, after much leave-taking, we saw them safely
embarked. As the canoe turned a bluff, they seized the paddles from the
hands of the old men, and waved them silently in the air. This was
meant for a touching farewell, as the paddle is only waved thus when
the parties separating never more expect to meet.

We now continued our journey; and, following the beach, soon came to a
level and lofty overhanging bank, which, planted here and there with
trees, took a broad sweep round a considerable part of the island.

A fine pathway skirted the edge of the bank; and often we paused to
admire the scenery. The evening was still and fair, even for so
heavenly a climate; and all round, as far as the eye could reach, was
the blending blue sky and ocean.

As we went on, the reef-belt still accompanied us; turning as we
turned, and thundering its distant bass upon the ear, like the unbroken
roar of a cataract. Dashing forever against their coral rampart, the
breakers looked, in the distance, like a line of rearing white
chargers, reined in, tossing their white manes, and bridling with foam.

These great natural breakwaters are admirably designed for the
protection of the land. Nearly all the Society Islands are defended by
them. Were the vast swells of the Pacific to break against the soft
alluvial bottoms which in many places border the sea, the soil would
soon be washed away, and the natives be thus deprived of their most
productive lands. As it is, the banks of no rivulet are firmer.

But the coral barriers answer another purpose. They form all the
harbours of this group, including the twenty-four round about the
shores of Tahiti. Curiously enough, the openings in the reefs, by which
alone vessels enter to their anchorage, are invariably opposite the
mouths of running streams: an advantage fully appreciated by the
mariner who touches for the purpose of watering his ship.

It is said that the fresh water of the land, mixing with the salts held
in solution by the sea, so acts upon the latter as to resist the
formation of the coral; and hence the breaks. Here and there, these
openings are sentinelled, as it were, by little fairy islets, green as
emerald, and waving with palms. Strangely and beautifully diversifying
the long line of breakers, no objects can strike the fancy more
vividly. Pomaree II., with a taste in watering-places truly Tahitian,
selected one of them as a royal retreat. We passed it on our journey.

Omitting several further adventures which befell us after leaving the
party from Loohooloo, we must now hurry on to relate what happened just
before reaching the place of our destination.




CHAPTER LXXII.
A DEALER IN THE CONTRABAND


It must have been at least the tenth day, reckoning from the Hegira,
that we found ourselves the guests of Varvy, an old hermit of an
islander who kept house by himself perhaps a couple of leagues from
Taloo.

A stone’s-cast from the beach there was a fantastic rock, moss-grown
and deep in a dell. It was insulated by a shallow brook, which,
dividing its waters, flowed on both sides until united below. Twisting
its roots round the rock, a gnarled “Aoa” spread itself overhead in a
wilderness of foliage; the elastic branch-roots depending from the
larger boughs insinuating themselves into every cleft, thus forming
supports to the parent stem. In some places these pendulous branches,
half-grown, had not yet reached the rock; swinging their loose fibrous
ends in the air like whiplashes.

Varvy’s hut, a mere coop of bamboos, was perched upon a level part of
the rock, the ridge-pole resting at one end in a crotch of the “Aoa,”
and the other propped by a forked bough planted in a fissure.

Notwithstanding our cries as we drew near, the first hint the old
hermit received of our approach was the doctor’s stepping up and
touching his shoulder, as he was kneeling over on a stone cleaning fish
in the brook. He leaped up, and stared at us. But with a variety of
uncouth gestures, he soon made us welcome; informing us, by the same
means, that he was both deaf and dumb; he then motioned us into his
dwelling.

Going in, we threw ourselves upon an old mat, and peered round. The
soiled bamboos and calabashes looked so uninviting that the doctor was
for pushing on to Taloo that night, notwithstanding it was near sunset.
But at length we concluded to stay where we were.

After a good deal of bustling outside under a decrepit shed, the old
man made his appearance with our supper. In one hand he held a
flickering taper, and in the other, a huge, flat calabash, scantily
filled with viands. His eyes were dancing in his head, and he looked
from the calabash to us, and from us to the calabash, as much as to
say, “Ah, my lads, what do ye think of this, eh? Pretty good cheer,
eh?” But the fish and Indian turnip being none of the best, we made but
a sorry meal. While discussing it, the old man tried hard to make
himself understood by signs; most of which were so excessively
ludicrous that we made no doubt he was perpetrating a series of
pantomimic jokes.

The remnants of the feast removed, our host left us for a moment,
returning with a calabash of portly dimensions and furnished with a
long, hooked neck, the mouth of which was stopped with a wooden plug.
It was covered with particles of earth, and looked as if just taken
from some place underground.

With sundry winks and horrible giggles peculiar to the dumb, the
vegetable demijohn was now tapped; the old fellow looking round
cautiously, and pointing at it; as much as to intimate that it
contained something which was “taboo,” or forbidden.

Aware that intoxicating liquors were strictly prohibited to the
natives, we now watched our entertainer with much interest. Charging a
cocoa-nut shell, he tossed it off, and then filling up again, presented
the goblet to me. Disliking the smell, I made faces at it; upon which
he became highly excited; so much so that a miracle was wrought upon
the spot. Snatching the cup from my hands, he shouted out, “Ah,
karhowree sabbee lee-lee ena arva tee maitai!” in other words, what a
blockhead of a white man! this is the real stuff!

We could not have been more startled had a frog leaped from his mouth.
For an instant, he looked confused enough himself; and then placing a
finger mysteriously upon his mouth, he contrived to make us understand
that at times he was subject to a suspension of the powers of speech.

Deeming the phenomenon a remarkable one, every way, the doctor desired
him to open his mouth so that he might have a look down. But he
refused.

This occurrence made us rather suspicious of our host; nor could we
afterward account for his conduct, except by supposing that his
feigning dumbness might in some way or other assist him in the
nefarious pursuits in which it afterwards turned out that he was
engaged. This conclusion, however, was not altogether satisfactory.

To oblige him, we at last took a sip of his “arva tee,” and found it
very crude, and strong as Lucifer. Curious to know whence it was
obtained, we questioned him; when, lighting up with pleasure, he seized
the taper, and led us outside the hut, bidding us follow.

After going some distance through the woods, we came to a dismantled
old shed of boughs, apparently abandoned to decay. Underneath, nothing
was to be seen but heaps of decaying leaves and an immense, clumsy jar,
wide-mouthed, and by some means, rudely hollowed out from a ponderous
stone.

Here, for a while, we were left to ourselves; the old man placing the
light in the jar, and then disappearing. He returned, carrying a long,
large bamboo, and a crotched stick. Throwing these down, he poked under
a pile of rubbish, and brought out a rough block of wood, pierced
through and through with a hole, which was immediately clapped on the
top of the jar. Then planting the crotched stick upright about two
yards distant, and making it sustain one end of the bamboo, he inserted
the other end of the latter into the hole in the block: concluding
these arrangements by placing an old calabash under the farther end of
the bamboo.

Coming up to us now with a sly, significant look, and pointing
admiringly at his apparatus, he exclaimed, “Ah, karhowree, ena
hannahanna arva tee!” as much as to say, “This, you see, is the way
it’s done.”

His contrivance was nothing less than a native still, where he
manufactured his island “poteen.” The disarray in which we found it was
probably intentional, as a security against detection. Before we left
the shed, the old fellow toppled the whole concern over, and dragged it
away piecemeal.

His disclosing his secret to us thus was characteristic of the “Tootai
Owrees,” or contemners of the missionaries among the natives; who,
presuming that all foreigners are opposed to the ascendancy of the
missionaries, take pleasure in making them confidants, whenever the
enactments of their rulers are secretly set at nought.

The substance from which the liquor is produced is called “Tee,” which
is a large, fibrous root, something like yam, but smaller. In its green
state, it is exceedingly acrid; but boiled or baked, has the sweetness
of the sugar-cane. After being subjected to the fire, macerated and
reduced to a certain stage of fermentation, the “Tee” is stirred up
with water, and is then ready for distillation.

On returning to the hut, pipes were introduced; and, after a while,
Long Ghost, who, at first, had relished the “Arva Tee” as little as
myself, to my surprise, began to wax sociable over it, with Varvy; and,
before long, absolutely got mellow, the old toper keeping him company.

It was a curious sight. Everyone knows that, so long as the occasion
lasts, there is no stronger bond of sympathy and good feeling among men
than getting tipsy together. And how earnestly, nay, movingly, a brace
of worthies, thus employed, will endeavour to shed light upon, and
elucidate their mystical ideas!

Fancy Varvy and the doctor, then, lovingly tippling, and brimming over
with a desire to become better acquainted; the doctor politely bent
upon carrying on the conversation in the language of his host, and the
old hermit persisting in trying to talk English. The result was that,
between the two, they made such a fricassee of vowels and consonants
that it was enough to turn one’s brain.

The next morning, on waking, I heard a voice from the tombs. It was the
doctor solemnly pronouncing himself a dead man. He was sitting up, with
both hands clasped over his forehead, and his pale face a thousand
times paler than ever.

“That infernal stuff has murdered me!” he cried. “Heavens! my head’s
all wheels and springs, like the automaton chess-player! What’s to be
done, Paul? I’m poisoned.”

But, after drinking a herbal draught concocted by our host, and eating
a light meal, at noon, he felt much better; so much so that he declared
himself ready to continue our journey.

When we came to start, the Yankee’s boots were missing; and, after a
diligent search, were not to be found. Enraged beyond measure, their
proprietor said that Varvy must have stolen them; but, considering his
hospitality, I thought this extremely improbable; though to whom else
to impute the theft I knew not. The doctor maintained, however, that
one who was capable of drugging an innocent traveller with “Arva Tee”
was capable of anything.

But it was in vain that he stormed, and Varvy and I searched; the boots
were gone.

Were it not for this mysterious occurrence, and Varvy’s detestable
liquors, I would here recommend all travellers going round by the beach
to Partoowye to stop at the Rock, and patronize the old gentleman—the
more especially as he entertains gratis.




CHAPTER LXXIII.
OUR RECEPTION IN PARTOOWYE


Upon starting, at last, I flung away my sandals—by this time quite worn
out—with the view of keeping company with the doctor, now forced to go
barefooted. Recovering his spirits in good time, he protested that
boots were a bore after all, and going without them decidedly manly.

This was said, be it observed, while strolling along over a soft carpet
of grass; a little moist, even at midday, from the shade of the wood
through which we were passing.

Emerging from this we entered upon a blank, sandy tract, upon which the
sun’s rays fairly flashed; making the loose gravel under foot well nigh
as hot as the floor of an oven. Such yelling and leaping as there was
in getting over this ground would be hard to surpass. We could not have
crossed at all—until toward sunset—had it not been for a few small,
wiry bushes growing here and there, into which we every now and then
thrust our feet to cool. There was no little judgment necessary in
selecting your bush; for if not chosen judiciously, the chances were
that, on springing forward again, and finding the next bush so far off
that an intermediate cooling was indispensable, you would have to run
back to your old place again.

Safely passing the Sahara, or Fiery Desert, we soothed our
half-blistered feet by a pleasant walk through a meadow of long grass,
which soon brought us in sight of a few straggling houses, sheltered by
a grove on the outskirts of the village of Partoowye.

My comrade was for entering the first one we came to; but, on drawing
near, they had so much of an air of pretension, at least for native
dwellings, that I hesitated; thinking they might be the residences of
the higher chiefs, from whom no very extravagant welcome was to be
anticipated.

While standing irresolute, a voice from the nearest house hailed us:
“Aramai! aramai, karhowree!” (Come in! come in, strangers!)

We at once entered, and were warmly greeted. The master of the house
was an aristocratic-looking islander, dressed in loose linen drawers, a
fine white shirt, and a sash of red silk tied about the waist, after
the fashion of the Spaniards in Chili. He came up to us with a free,
frank air, and, striking his chest with his hand, introduced himself as
Ereemear Po-Po; or, to render the Christian name back again into
English—Jeremiah Po-Po.

These curious combinations of names among the people of the Society
Islands originate in the following way. When a native is baptized, his
patronymic often gives offence to the missionaries, and they insist
upon changing to something else whatever is objectionable therein. So,
when Jeremiah came to the font, and gave his name as Narmo-Nana Po-Po
(something equivalent to The-Darer-of-Devils-by-Night), the reverend
gentleman officiating told him that such a heathenish appellation would
never do, and a substitute must be had; at least for the devil part of
it. Some highly respectable Christian appellations were then submitted,
from which the candidate for admission into the church was at liberty
to choose. There was Adamo (Adam), Nooar (Noah), Daveedar (David),
Earcobar (James), Eorna (John), Patoora (Peter), Ereemear (Jeremiah),
etc. And thus did he come to be named Jeremiah Po-Po; or,
Jeremiah-in-the-Dark—which he certainly was, I fancy, as to the
ridiculousness of his new cognomen.

We gave our names in return; upon which he bade us be seated; and,
sitting down himself, asked us a great many questions, in mixed English
and Tahitian. After giving some directions to an old man to prepare
food, our host’s wife, a large, benevolent-looking woman, upwards of
forty, also sat down by us. In our soiled and travel-stained
appearance, the good lady seemed to find abundant matter for
commiseration; and all the while kept looking at us piteously, and
making mournful exclamations.

But Jeremiah and his spouse were not the only inmates of the mansion.

In one corner, upon a large native couch, elevated upon posts, reclined
a nymph; who, half-veiled in her own long hair, had yet to make her
toilet for the day. She was the daughter of Po-Po; and a very beautiful
little daughter she was; not more than fourteen; with the most
delightful shape—like a bud just blown; and large hazel eyes. They
called her Loo; a name rather pretty and genteel, and therefore quite
appropriate; for a more genteel and lady-like little damsel there was
not in all Imeeo.

She was a cold and haughty young beauty though, this same little Loo,
and never deigned to notice us; further than now and then to let her
eyes float over our persons, with an expression of indolent
indifference. With the tears of the Loohooloo girls hardly dry from
their sobbing upon our shoulders, this contemptuous treatment stung us
not a little.

When we first entered, Po-Po was raking smooth the carpet of dried
ferns which had that morning been newly laid; and now that our meal was
ready, it was spread on a banana leaf, right upon this fragrant floor.
Here we lounged at our ease, eating baked pig and breadfruit off
earthen plates, and using, for the first time in many a long month,
real knives and forks.

These, as well as other symptoms of refinement, somewhat abated our
surprise at the reserve of the little Loo; her parents, doubtless, were
magnates in Partoowye, and she herself was an heiress.

After being informed of our stay in the vale of Martair, they were very
curious to know on what errand we came to Taloo. We merely hinted that
the ship lying in the harbour was the reason of our coming.

Arfretee, Po-Po’s wife, was a right motherly body. The meal over, she
recommended a nap; and upon our waking much refreshed, she led us to
the doorway, and pointed down among the trees; through which we saw the
gleam of water. Taking the hint, we repaired thither; and finding a
deep shaded pool, bathed, and returned to the house. Our hostess now
sat down by us; and after looking with great interest at the doctor’s
cloak, felt of my own soiled and tattered garments for the hundredth
time, and exclaimed plaintively—“Ah nuee nuee olee manee! olee manee!”
(Alas! they are very, very old! very old!)

When Arfretee, good soul, thus addressed us, she thought she was
talking very respectable English. The word “nuee” is so familiar to
foreigners throughout Polynesia, and is so often used by them in their
intercourse with the natives, that the latter suppose it to be common
to all mankind. “Olee manee” is the native pronunciation of “old man,”
which, by Society Islanders talking Saxon, is applied indiscriminately
to all aged things and persons whatsoever.

Going to a chest filled with various European articles, she took out
two suits of new sailor frocks and trousers; and presenting them with a
gracious smile, pushed us behind a calico screen, and left us. Without
any fastidious scruples, we donned the garments; and what with the
meal, the nap, and the bath, we now came forth like a couple of
bridegrooms.

Evening drawing on, lamps were lighted. They were very simple; the half
of a green melon, about one third full of cocoa-nut oil, and a wick of
twisted tappa floating on the surface. As a night lamp, this
contrivance cannot be excelled; a soft dreamy light being shed through
the transparent rind.

As the evening advanced, other members of the household, whom as yet we
had not seen, began to drop in. There was a slender young dandy in a
gay striped shirt, and whole fathoms of bright figured calico tucked
about his waist, and falling to the ground. He wore a new straw hat
also with three distinct ribbons tied about the crown; one black, one
green, and one pink. Shoes or stockings, however, he had none.

There were a couple of delicate, olive-cheeked little girls—twins—with
mild eyes and beautiful hair, who ran about the house, half-naked, like
a couple of gazelles. They had a brother, somewhat younger—a fine dark
boy, with an eye like a woman’s. All these were the children of Po-Po,
begotten in lawful wedlock.

Then there were two or three queer-looking old ladies, who wore shabby
mantles of soiled sheeting, which fitted so badly, and withal had such
a second-hand look that I at once put their wearers down as domestic
paupers—poor relations, supported by the bounty of My Lady Arfretee.
They were sad, meek old bodies; said little and ate less; and either
kept their eyes on the ground, or lifted them up deferentially. The
semi-civilization of the island must have had something to do with
making them what they were.

I had almost forgotten Monee, the grinning old man who prepared our
meal. His head was a shining, bald globe. He had a round little paunch,
and legs like a cat. He was Po-Po’s factotum—cook, butler, and climber
of the bread-fruit and cocoa-nut trees; and, added to all else, a
mighty favourite with his mistress; with whom he would sit smoking and
gossiping by the hour.

Often you saw the indefatigable Monee working away at a great rate;
then dropping his employment all at once—never mind what—run off to a
little distance, and after rolling himself away in a corner and taking
a nap, jump up again, and fall to with fresh vigour.

From a certain something in the behaviour of Po-Po and his household, I
was led to believe that he was a pillar of the church; though, from
what I had seen in Tahiti, I could hardly reconcile such a supposition
with his frank, cordial, unembarrassed air. But I was not wrong in my
conjecture: Po-Po turned out to be a sort of elder, or deacon; he was
also accounted a man of wealth, and was nearly related to a high chief.

Before retiring, the entire household gathered upon the floor; and in
their midst, he read aloud a chapter from a Tahitian Bible. Then
kneeling with the rest of us, he offered up a prayer. Upon its
conclusion, all separated without speaking. These devotions took place
regularly, every night and morning. Grace too was invariably said, by
this family, both before and after eating.

After becoming familiarized with the almost utter destitution of
anything like practical piety upon these islands, what I observed in
our host’s house astonished me much. But whatever others might have
been, Po-Po was, in truth, a Christian: the only one, Arfretee
excepted, whom I personally knew to be such, among all the natives of
Polynesia.




CHAPTER LXXIV.
RETIRING FOR THE NIGHT—THE DOCTOR GROWS DEVOUT


They put us to bed very pleasantly.

Lying across the foot of Po-Po’s nuptial couch was a smaller one made
of Koar-wood; a thin, strong cord, twisted from the fibres of the husk
of the cocoa-nut, and woven into an exceedingly light sort of network,
forming its elastic body. Spread upon this was a single, fine mat, with
a roll of dried ferns for a pillow, and a strip of white tappa for a
sheet. This couch was mine. The doctor was provided for in another
corner.

Loo reposed alone on a little settee with a taper burning by her side;
the dandy, her brother, swinging overhead in a sailor’s hammock The two
gazelles frisked upon a mat near by; and the indigent relations
borrowed a scant corner of the old butler’s pallet, who snored away by
the open door. After all had retired, Po-Po placed the illuminated
melon in the middle of the apartment; and so, we all slumbered till
morning.

Upon awaking, the sun was streaming brightly through the open bamboos,
but no one was stirring. After surveying the fine attitudes into which
forgetfulness had thrown at least one of the sleepers, my attention was
called off to the general aspect of the dwelling, which was quite
significant of the superior circumstances of our host.

The house itself was built in the simple, but tasteful native style. It
was a long, regular oval, some fifty feet in length, with low sides of
cane-work, and a roof thatched with palmetto-leaves. The ridgepole was,
perhaps, twenty feet from the ground. There was no foundation whatever;
the bare earth being merely covered with ferns; a kind of carpeting
which serves very well, if frequently renewed; otherwise, it becomes
dusty, and the haunt of vermin, as in the huts of the poorer natives.

Besides the couches, the furniture consisted of three or four sailor
chests; in which were stored the fine wearing-apparel of the
household—the ruffled linen shirts of Po-Po, the calico dresses of his
wife and children, and divers odds and ends of European
articles—strings of beads, ribbons, Dutch looking-glasses, knives,
coarse prints, bunches of keys, bits of crockery, and metal buttons.
One of these chests—used as a bandbox by Arfretee—contained several of
the native hats (coal-scuttles), all of the same pattern, but trimmed
with variously-coloured ribbons. Of nothing was our good hostess more
proud than of these hats, and her dresses. On Sundays, she went abroad
a dozen times; and every time, like Queen Elizabeth, in a different
robe.

Po-Po, for some reason or other, always gave us our meals before the
rest of the family were served; and the doctor, who was very discerning
in such matters, declared that we fared much better than they. Certain
it was that, had Ereemear’s guests travelled with purses, portmanteau,
and letters of introduction to the queen, they could not have been
better cared for.

The day after our arrival, Monee, the old butler, brought us in for
dinner a small pig, baked in the ground. All savoury, it lay in a
wooden trencher, surrounded by roasted hemispheres of the breadfruit. A
large calabash, filled with taro pudding, or poee, followed; and the
young dandy, overcoming his customary languor, threw down our
cocoa-nuts from an adjoining tree.

When all was ready, and the household looking on, Long Ghost, devoutly
clasping his hands over the fated pig, implored a blessing. Hereupon,
everybody present looked exceedingly pleased; Po-Po coming up and
addressing the doctor with much warmth; and Arfretee, regarding him
with almost maternal affection, exclaimed delightedly, “Ah! mickonaree
tata matai!” in other words, “What a pious young man!”

It was just after this meal that she brought me a roll of grass sinnate
(of the kind which sailors sew into the frame of their tarpaulins), and
then, handing me needle and thread, bade me begin at once, and make
myself the hat which I so much needed. An accomplished hand at the
business, I finished it that day—merely stitching the braid together;
and Arfretee, by way of rewarding my industry, with her own olive hands
ornamented the crown with a band of flame-coloured ribbon; the two long
ends of which streaming behind, sailor-fashion, still preserved for me
the Eastern title bestowed by Long Ghost.




CHAPTER LXXV.
A RAMBLE THROUGH THE SETTLEMENT


The following morning, making our toilets carefully, we donned our
sombreros, and sallied out on a tour. Without meaning to reveal our
designs upon the court, our principal object was, to learn what chances
there were for white men to obtain employment under the queen. On this
head, it is true, we had questioned Po-Po; but his answers had been
very discouraging; so we determined to obtain further information
elsewhere.

But, first, to give some little description of the village.

The settlement of Partoowye is nothing more than some eighty houses,
scattered here and there, in the midst of an immense grove, where the
trees have been thinned out and the underbrush cleared away. Through
the grove flows a stream; and the principal avenue crosses it, over an
elastic bridge of cocoa-nut trunks, laid together side by side. The
avenue is broad, and serpentine; well shaded from one end to the other,
and as pretty a place for a morning promenade as any lounger could
wish. The houses, constructed without the slightest regard to the road,
peep into view from among the trees on either side: some looking you
right in the face as you pass, and others, without any manners, turning
their backs. Occasionally you observe a rural retreat, inclosed by a
picket of bamboos, or with a solitary pane of glass massively framed in
the broadside of the dwelling, or with a rude, strange-looking door,
swinging upon dislocated wooden hinges. Otherwise, the dwellings are
built in the original style of the natives; and never mind how mean and
filthy some of them may appear within, they all look picturesque enough
without.

As we sauntered along the people we met saluted us pleasantly, and
invited us into their houses; and in this way we made a good many brief
morning calls. But the hour could not have been the fashionable one in
Partoowye, since the ladies were invariably in dishabille. But they
always gave us a cordial reception, and were particularly polite to the
doctor; caressing him, and amorously hanging about his neck;
wonderfully taken up, in short, with a gay handkerchief he wore there.
Arfretee had that morning bestowed it upon the pious youth.

With some exceptions, the general appearance of the natives of
Partoowye was far better than that of the inhabitants of Papeetee: a
circumstance only to be imputed to their restricted intercourse with
foreigners.

Strolling on, we turned a sweep of the road, when the doctor gave a
start; and no wonder. Right before us, in the grove, was a block of
houses: regular square frames, boarded over, furnished with windows and
doorways, and two stories high. We ran up and found them fast going to
decay: very dingy, and here and there covered with moss; no sashes, no
doors; and on one side, the entire block had settled down nearly a
foot. On going into the basement we looked clean up through the
unbearded timbers to the roof; where rays of light, glimmering through
many a chink, illuminated the cobwebs which swung all round.

The whole interior was dark and close. Burrowing among some old mats in
one corner, like a parcel of gipsies in a ruin, were a few vagabond
natives. They had their dwelling here.

Curious to know who on earth could have been thus trying to improve the
value of real estate in Partoowye, we made inquiries; and learned that
some years previous the block had been thrown up by a veritable Yankee
(one might have known that), a house-carpenter by trade, and a bold,
enterprising fellow by nature.

Put ashore from his ship, sick, he first went to work and got well;
then sallied out with chisel and plane, and made himself generally
useful. A sober, steady man, it seems, he at last obtained the
confidence of several chiefs, and soon filled them with all sorts of
ideas concerning the alarming want of public spirit in the people of
Imeeo. More especially did he dwell upon the humiliating fact of their
living in paltry huts of bamboo, when magnificent palaces of boards
might so easily be mortised together.

In the end, these representations so far prevailed with one old chief
that the carpenter was engaged to build a batch of these wonderful
palaces. Provided with plenty of men, he at once set to work: built a
saw-mill among the mountains, felled trees, and sent over to Papeetee
for nails.

Presto! the castle rose; but alas, the roof was hardly on, when the
Yankee’s patron, having speculated beyond his means, broke all to
pieces, and was absolutely unable to pay one “plug” of tobacco in the
pound. His failure involved the carpenter, who sailed away from his
creditors in the very next ship that touched at the harbour.

The natives despised the rickety palace of boards; and often lounged
by, wagging their heads, and jeering.

We were told that the queen’s residence was at the extreme end of the
village; so, without waiting for the doctor to procure a fiddle, we
suddenly resolved upon going thither at once, and learning whether any
privy counsellorships were vacant.

Now, although there was a good deal of my waggish comrade’s nonsense
about what has been said concerning our expectations of court
preferment, we, nevertheless, really thought that something to our
advantage might turn up in that quarter.

On approaching the palace grounds, we found them rather peculiar. A
broad pier of hewn coral rocks was built right out into the water; and
upon this, and extending into a grove adjoining, were some eight or ten
very large native houses, constructed in the handsomest style and
inclosed together by a low picket of bamboos, which embraced a
considerable area.

Throughout the Society Islands, the residences of the chiefs are mostly
found in the immediate vicinity of the sea; a site which gives them the
full benefit of a cooling breeze; nor are they so liable to the
annoyance of insects; besides enjoying, when they please, the fine
shade afforded by the neighbouring groves, always most luxuriant near
the water.

Lounging about the grounds were some sixty or eighty handsomely-dressed
natives, men and women; some reclining on the shady side of the houses,
others under the trees, and a small group conversing close by the
railing facing us.

We went up to the latter; and giving the usual salutation, were on the
point of vaulting over the bamboos, when they turned upon us angrily,
and said we could not enter. We stated our earnest desire to see the
queen; hinting that we were bearers of important dispatches. But it was
to no purpose; and not a little vexed, we were obliged to return to
Po-Po’s without effecting anything.




CHAPTER LXXVI.
AN ISLAND JILT—WE VISIT THE SHIP


Upon arriving home we fully laid open to Po-Po our motives in visiting
Taloo, and begged his friendly advice. In his broken English he
cheerfully gave us all the information we needed.

It was true, he said, that the queen entertained some idea of making a
stand against the French; and it was currently reported also that
several chiefs from Borabora, Huwyenee, Raiatair, and Tahar, the
leeward islands of the group, were at that very time taking counsel
with her as to the expediency of organizing a general movement
throughout the entire cluster, with a view of anticipating any further
encroachments on the part of the invaders. Should warlike measures be
actually decided upon, it was quite certain that Pomaree would be glad
to enlist all the foreigners she could; but as to her making officers
of either the doctor or me, that was out of the question; because,
already, a number of Europeans, well known to her, had volunteered as
such. Concerning our getting immediate access to the queen, Po-Po told
us it was rather doubtful; she living at that time very retired, in
poor health, and spirits, and averse to receiving calls. Previous to
her misfortunes, however, no one, however humble, was denied admittance
to her presence; sailors, even, attended her levees.

Not at all disheartened by these things, we concluded to kill time in
Partoowye until some event turned up more favourable to our projects.
So that very day we sallied out on an excursion to the ship which,
lying land-locked far up the bay, yet remained to be visited.

Passing on our route a long, low shed, a voice hailed us—“White men
ahoy!” Turning round, who should we see but a rosy-cheeked Englishman
(you could tell his country at a glance), up to his knees in shavings,
and planing away at a bench. He turned out to be a runaway ship’s
carpenter, recently from Tahiti, and now doing a profitable business in
Imeeo, by fitting up the dwellings of opulent chiefs with cupboards and
other conveniences, and once in a while trying his hand at a lady’s
work-box. He had been in the settlement but a few months, and already
possessed houses and lands.

But though blessed with prosperity and high health, there was one thing
wanting—a wife. And when he came to speak of the matter, his
countenance fell, and he leaned dejectedly upon his plane.

“It’s too bad!” he sighed, “to wait three long years; and all the
while, dear little Lullee living in the same house with that infernal
chief from Tahar!”

Our curiosity was piqued; the poor carpenter, then, had been falling in
love with some island coquette, who was going to jilt him.

But such was not the case. There was a law prohibiting, under a heavy
penalty, the marriage of a native with a foreigner, unless the latter,
after being three years a resident on the island, was willing to affirm
his settled intention of remaining for life.

William was therefore in a sad way. He told us that he might have
married the girl half-a-dozen times, had it not been for this odious
law: but, latterly, she had become less loving and more giddy,
particularly with the strangers from Tahar. Desperately smitten, and
desirous of securing her at all hazards, he had proposed to the
damsel’s friends a nice little arrangement, introductory to marriage;
but they would not hear of it; besides, if the pair were discovered
living together upon such a footing, they would be liable to a
degrading punishment:—sent to work making stone walls and opening roads
for the queen.

Doctor Long Ghost was all sympathy. “Bill, my good fellow,” said he,
tremulously, “let me go and talk to her.” But Bill, declining the
offer, would not even inform us where his charmer lived.

Leaving the disconsolate Willie planing a plank of New Zealand pine (an
importation from the Bay of Islands), and thinking the while of Lullee,
we went on our way. How his suit prospered in the end we never learned.

Going from Po-Po’s house toward the anchorage of the harbour of Taloo,
you catch no glimpse of the water until, coming out from deep groves,
you all at once find yourself upon the beach. A bay, considered by many
voyagers the most beautiful in the South Seas, then lies before you.
You stand upon one side of what seems a deep green river, flowing
through mountain passes to the sea. Right opposite a majestic
promontory divides the inlet from another, called after its discoverer,
Captain Cook. The face of this promontory toward Taloo is one verdant
wall; and at its base the waters lie still and fathomless. On the left
hand, you just catch a peep of the widening mouth of the bay, the break
in the reef by which ships enter, and, beyond, the sea. To the right,
the inlet, sweeping boldly round the promontory, runs far away into the
land; where, save in one direction, the hills close in on every side,
knee-deep in verdure and shooting aloft in grotesque peaks. The open
space lies at the head of the bay; in the distance it extends into a
broad hazy plain lying at the foot of an amphitheatre of hills. Here is
the large sugar plantation previously alluded to. Beyond the first
range of hills, you descry the sharp pinnacles of the interior; and
among these, the same silent Marling-spike which we so often admired
from the other side of the island.

All alone in the harbour lay the good ship Leviathan. We jumped into
the canoe, and paddled off to her. Though early in the afternoon,
everything was quiet; but upon mounting the side we found four or five
sailors lounging about the forecastle, under an awning. They gave us no
very cordial reception; and though otherwise quite hearty in
appearance, seemed to assume a look of ill-humour on purpose to honour
our arrival. There was much eagerness to learn whether we wanted to
“ship”; and by the unpleasant accounts they gave of the vessel, they
seemed desirous to prevent such a thing if possible.

We asked where the rest of the ship’s company were; a gruff old fellow
made answer, “One boat’s crew of ’em is gone to Davy Jones’s
locker:—went off after a whale, last cruise, and never come back agin.
All the starboard watch ran away last night, and the skipper’s ashore
kitching ’em.”

“And it’s shipping yer after, my jewels, is it?” cried a curly-pated
little Belfast sailor, coming up to us, “thin arrah! my livelies, jist
be after sailing ashore in a jiffy:—the divil of a skipper will carry
yees both to sea, whether or no. Be off wid ye thin, darlints, and
steer clear of the likes of this ballyhoo of blazes as long as ye live.
They murther us here every day, and starve us into the bargain. Here,
Dick, lad, har! the poor divil’s canow alongside; and paddle away wid
yees for dear life.”

But we loitered awhile, listening to more inducements to ship; and at
last concluded to stay to supper. My sheath-knife never cut into better
sea-beef than that which we found lying in the kid in the forecastle.
The bread, too, was hard, dry, and brittle as glass; and there was
plenty of both.

While we were below, the mate of the vessel called out for someone to
come on deck. I liked his voice. Hearing it was as good as a look at
his face. It betokened a true sailor, and no taskmaster.

The appearance of the Leviathan herself was quite pleasing. Like all
large, comfortable old whalers, she had a sort of motherly look:—broad
in the beam, flush decks, and four chubby boats hanging at the breast.
Her sails were furled loosely upon the yards, as if they had been worn
long, and fitted easy; her shrouds swung negligently slack; and as for
the “running rigging,” it never worked hard as it does in some of your
“dandy ships,” jamming in the sheaves of blocks, like Chinese slippers,
too small to be useful: on the contrary, the ropes ran glibly through,
as if they had many a time travelled the same road, and were used to
it.

When evening came, we dropped into our canoe, and paddled ashore; fully
convinced that the good ship never deserved the name which they gave
her.




CHAPTER LXXVII.
A PARTY OF ROVERS—LITTLE LOO AND THE DOCTOR


While in Partoowye, we fell in with a band of six veteran rovers,
prowling about the village and harbour, who had just come overland from
another part of the island.

A few weeks previous, they had been paid off, at Papeetee, from a
whaling vessel, on board of which they had, six months before, shipped
for a single cruise; that is to say, to be discharged at the next port.
Their cruise was a famous one; and each man stepped upon the beach at
Tahiti jingling his dollars in a sock.

Weary at last of the shore, and having some money left, they clubbed,
and purchased a sail-boat; proposing a visit to a certain uninhabited
island, concerning which they had heard strange and golden stories. Of
course, they never could think of going to sea without a medicine-chest
filled with flasks of spirits, and a small cask of the same in the hold
in case the chest should give out.

Away they sailed; hoisted a flag of their own, and gave three times
three, as they staggered out of the bay of Papeetee with a strong
breeze, and under all the “muslin” they could carry.

Evening coming on, and feeling in high spirits and no ways disposed to
sleep, they concluded to make a night of it; which they did; all hands
getting tipsy, and the two masts going over the side about midnight, to
the tune of

“Sailing down, sailing down, On the coast of Barbaree.”

Fortunately, one worthy could stand by holding on to the tiller; and
the rest managed to crawl about, and hack away the lanyards of the
rigging, so as to break clear from the fallen spars. While thus
employed, two sailors got tranquilly over the side, and went plumb to
the bottom, under the erroneous impression that they were stepping upon
an imaginary wharf to get at their work better.

After this, it blew quite a gale; and the commodore, at the helm,
instinctively kept the boat before the wind; and by so doing, ran over
for the opposite island of Imeeo. Crossing the channel, by almost a
miracle they went straight through an opening in the reef, and shot
upon a ledge of coral, where the waters were tolerably smooth. Here
they lay until morning, when the natives came off to them in their
canoes. By the help of the islanders, the schooner was hove over on her
beam-ends; when, finding the bottom knocked to pieces, the adventurers
sold the boat for a trifle to the chief of the district, and went
ashore, rolling before them their precious cask of spirits. Its
contents soon evaporated, and they came to Partoowye.

The day after encountering these fellows, we were strolling among the
groves in the neighbourhood, when we came across several parties of
natives armed with clumsy muskets, rusty cutlasses, and outlandish
clubs. They were beating the bushes, shouting aloud, and apparently
trying to scare somebody. They were in pursuit of the strangers, who,
having in a single night set at nought all the laws of the place, had
thought best to decamp.

In the daytime, Po-Po’s house was as pleasant a lounge as one could
wish. So, after strolling about, and seeing all there was to be seen,
we spent the greater part of our mornings there; breakfasting late, and
dining about two hours after noon. Sometimes we lounged on the floor of
ferns, smoking, and telling stories; of which the doctor had as many as
a half-pay captain in the army. Sometimes we chatted, as well as we
could, with the natives; and, one day—joy to us!—Po-Po brought in three
volumes of Smollett’s novels, which had been found in the chest of a
sailor, who some time previous had died on the island.

Amelia!—Peregrine!—you hero of rogues, Count Fathom!—what a debt do we
owe you!

I know not whether it was the reading of these romances, or the want of
some sentimental pastime, which led the doctor, about this period, to
lay siege to the heart of the little Loo.

Now, as I have said before, the daughter of Po-Po was most cruelly
reserved, and never deigned to notice us. Frequently I addressed her
with a long face and an air of the profoundest and most distant
respect—but in vain; she wouldn’t even turn up her pretty olive nose.
Ah! it’s quite plain, thought I; she knows very well what graceless
dogs sailors are, and won’t have anything to do with us.

But thus thought not my comrade. Bent he was upon firing the cold
glitter of Loo’s passionless eyes.

He opened the campaign with admirable tact: making cautious approaches,
and content, for three days, with ogling the nymph for about five
minutes after every meal. On the fourth day, he asked her a question;
on the fifth, she dropped a nut of ointment, and he picked it up and
gave it to her; on the sixth, he went over and sat down within three
yards of the couch where she lay; and, on the memorable morn of the
seventh, he proceeded to open his batteries in form.

The damsel was reclining on the ferns; one hand supporting her cheek,
and the other listlessly turning over the leaves of a Tahitian Bible.
The doctor approached.

Now the chief disadvantage under which he laboured was his almost
complete ignorance of the love vocabulary of the island. But French
counts, they say, make love delightfully in broken English; and what
hindered the doctor from doing the same in dulcet Tahitian. So at it he
went.

“Ah!” said he, smiling bewitchingly, “oee mickonaree; oee ready
Biblee?”

No answer; not even a look.

“Ah I matai! very goody ready Biblee mickonaree.”

Loo, without stirring, began reading, in a low tone, to herself.

“Mickonaree Biblee ready goody maitai,” once more observed the doctor,
ingeniously transposing his words for the third time.

But all to no purpose; Loo gave no sign.

He paused, despairingly; but it would never do to give up; so he threw
himself at full length beside her, and audaciously commenced turning
over the leaves.

Loo gave a start, just one little start, barely perceptible, and then,
fumbling something in her hand, lay perfectly motionless; the doctor
rather frightened at his own temerity, and knowing not what to do next.
At last, he placed one arm cautiously about her waist; almost in the
same instant he bounded to his feet, with a cry; the little witch had
pierced him with a thorn. But there she lay, just as quietly as ever,
turning over the leaves, and reading to herself.

My long friend raised the siege incontinently, and made a disorderly
retreat to the place where I reclined, looking on.

I am pretty sure that Loo must have related this occurrence to her
father, who came in shortly afterward; for he looked queerly at the
doctor. But he said nothing; and, in ten minutes, was quite as affable
as ever. As for Loo, there was not the slightest change in her; and the
doctor, of course, for ever afterwards held his peace.




CHAPTER LXXVIII.
MRS. BELL


One day, taking a pensive afternoon stroll along one of the many
bridle-paths which wind among the shady groves in the neighbourhood of
Taloo, I was startled by a sunny apparition. It was that of a beautiful
young Englishwoman, charmingly dressed, and mounted upon a spirited
little white pony. Switching a green branch, she came cantering toward
me.

I looked round to see whether I could possibly be in Polynesia. There
were the palm-trees; but how to account for the lady?

Stepping to one side as the apparition drew near, I made a polite
obeisance. It gave me a bold, rosy look; and then, with a gay air,
patted its palfrey, crying out, “Fly away, Willie!” and galloped among
the trees.

I would have followed; but Willie’s heels were making such a pattering
among the dry leaves that pursuit would have been useless.

So I went straight home to Po-Po’s, and related my adventure to the
doctor.

The next day, our inquiries resulted in finding out that the stranger
had been on the island about two years; that she came from Sydney; and
was the wife of Mr. Bell (happy dog!), the proprietor of the sugar
plantation to which I have previously referred.

To the sugar plantation we went, the same day.

The country round about was very beautiful: a level basin of verdure,
surrounded by sloping hillsides. The sugar-cane—of which there was
about one hundred acres, in various stages of cultivation—looked
thrifty. A considerable tract of land, however, which seemed to have
been formerly tilled, was now abandoned.

The place where they extracted the saccharine matter was under an
immense shed of bamboos. Here we saw several clumsy pieces of machinery
for breaking the cane; also great kettles for boiling the sugar. But,
at present, nothing was going on. Two or three natives were lounging in
one of the kettles, smoking; the other was occupied by three sailors
from the Leviathan, playing cards.

While we were conversing with these worthies, a stranger approached. He
was a sun-burnt, romantic-looking European, dressed in a loose suit of
nankeen; his fine throat and chest were exposed, and he sported a
Guayaquil hat with a brim like a Chinese umbrella. This was Mr. Bell.
He was very civil; showed us the grounds, and, taking us into a sort of
arbour, to our surprise, offered to treat us to some wine. People often
do the like; but Mr. Bell did more: he produced the bottle. It was
spicy sherry; and we drank out of the halves of fresh citron melons.
Delectable goblets!

The wine was a purchase from, the French in Tahiti.

Now all this was extremely polite in Mr. Bell; still, we came to see
Mrs. Bell. But she proved to be a phantom, indeed; having left the same
morning for Papeetee, on a visit to one of the missionaries’ wives
there.

I went home, much chagrined.

To be frank, my curiosity had been wonderfully piqued concerning the
lady. In the first place, she was the most beautiful white woman I ever
saw in Polynesia. But this is saying nothing. She had such eyes, such
moss-roses in her cheeks, such a divine air in the saddle, that, to my
dying day, I shall never forget Mrs. Bell.

The sugar-planter himself was young, robust, and handsome. So, merrily
may the little Bells increase, and multiply, and make music in the Land
of Imeeo.




CHAPTER LXXIX.
TALOO CHAPEL—HOLDING COURT IN POLYNESIA


In Partoowye is to be seen one of the best-constructed and handsomest
chapels in the South Seas. Like the buildings of the palace, it stands
upon an artificial pier, presenting a semicircular sweep to the bay.
The chapel is built of hewn blocks of coral; a substance which,
although extremely friable, is said to harden by exposure to the
atmosphere. To a stranger, these blocks look extremely curious. Their
surface is covered with strange fossil-like impressions, the seal of
which must have been set before the flood. Very nearly white when hewn
from the reefs, the coral darkens with age; so that several churches in
Polynesia now look almost as sooty and venerable as famed St. Paul’s.

In shape, the chapel is an octagon, with galleries all round. It will
seat, perhaps, four hundred people. Everything within is stained a
tawny red; and there being but few windows, or rather embrasures, the
dusky benches and galleries, and the tall spectre of a pulpit look
anything but cheerful.

On Sundays we always went to worship here. Going in the family suite of
Po-Po, we, of course, maintained a most decorous exterior; and hence,
by all the elderly people of the village, were doubtless regarded as
pattern young men.

Po-Po’s seat was in a snug corner; and it being particularly snug, in
the immediate vicinity of one of the Palm pillars supporting the
gallery, I invariably leaned against it: Po-Po and his lady on one
side, the doctor and the dandy on the other, and the children and poor
relations seated behind.

As for Loo, instead of sitting (as she ought to have done) by her good
father and mother, she must needs run up into the gallery, and sit with
a parcel of giddy creatures of her own age; who, all through the
sermon, did nothing but look down on the congregation; pointing out,
and giggling at the queer-looking old ladies in dowdy bonnets and scant
tunics. But Loo, herself, was never guilty of these improprieties.

Occasionally during the week they have afternoon service in the chapel,
when the natives themselves have something to say; although their
auditors are but few. An introductory prayer being offered by the
missionary, and a hymn sung, communicants rise in their places, and
exhort in pure Tahitian, and with wonderful tone and gesture. And among
them all, Deacon Po-Po, though he talked most, was the one whom you
would have liked best to hear. Much would I have given to have
understood some of his impassioned bursts; when he tossed his arms
overhead, stamped, scowled, and glared, till he looked like the very
Angel of Vengeance.

“Deluded man!” sighed the doctor, on one of these occasions, “I fear he
takes the fanatical view of the subject.” One thing was certain: when
Po-Po spoke, all listened; a great deal more than could be said for the
rest; for under the discipline of two or three I could mention, some of
the audience napped; others fidgeted; a few yawned; and one irritable
old gentleman, in a nightcap of cocoa-nut leaves, used to clutch his
long staff in a state of excessive nervousness, and stride out of the
church, making all the noise he could, to emphasize his disgust.

Right adjoining the chapel is an immense, rickety building, with
windows and shutters, and a half-decayed board flooring laid upon
trunks of palm-trees. They called it a school-house; but as such we
never saw it occupied. It was often used as a court-room, however; and
here we attended several trials; among others, that of a decayed naval
officer, and a young girl of fourteen; the latter charged with having
been very naughty on a particular occasion set forth in the pleadings;
and the former with having aided and abetted her in her naughtiness,
and with other misdemeanours.

The foreigner was a tall, military-looking fellow, with a dark cheek
and black whiskers. According to his own account, he had lost a
colonial armed brig on the coast of New Zealand; and since then, had
been leading the life of a man about town among the islands of the
Pacific.

The doctor wanted to know why he did not go home and report the loss of
his brig; but Captain Crash, as they called him, had some
incomprehensible reasons for not doing so, about which he could talk by
the hour, and no one be any the wiser. Probably he was a discreet man,
and thought it best to waive an interview with the lords of the
admiralty.

For some time past, this extremely suspicious character had been
carrying on the illicit trade in French wines and brandies, smuggled
over from the men-of-war lately touching at Tahiti. In a grove near the
anchorage he had a rustic shanty and arbour, where, in quiet times,
when no ships were in Taloo, a stray native once in a while got boozy,
and staggered home, catching at the cocoa-nut trees as he went. The
captain himself lounged under a tree during the warm afternoons, pipe
in mouth; thinking, perhaps, over old times, and occasionally feeling
his shoulders for his lost epaulets.

But, sail ho! a ship is descried coming into the bay. Soon she drops
her anchor in its waters; and the next day Captain Crash entertains the
sailors in his grove. And rare times they have of it:—drinking and
quarrelling together as sociably as you please.

Upon one of these occasions, the crew of the Leviathan made so
prodigious a tumult that the natives, indignant at the insult offered
their laws, plucked up a heart, and made a dash at the rioters, one
hundred strong. The sailors fought like tigers; but were at last
overcome, and carried before a native tribunal; which, after a mighty
clamour, dismissed everybody but Captain Crash, who was asserted to be
the author of the disorders.

Upon this charge, then, he had been placed in confinement against the
coming on of the assizes; the judge being expected to lounge along in
the course of the afternoon. While waiting his Honour’s arrival,
numerous additional offences were preferred against the culprit (mostly
by the old women); among others was the bit of a slip in which he stood
implicated along with the young lady. Thus, in Polynesia as
elsewhere;—charge a man with one misdemeanour, and all his peccadilloes
are raked up and assorted before him.

Going to the school-house for the purpose of witnessing the trial, the
din of it assailed our ears a long way off; and upon entering the
building, we were almost stunned. About five hundred natives were
present; each apparently having something to say and determined to say
it. His Honour—a handsome, benevolent-looking old man—sat cross-legged
on a little platform, seemingly resigned, with all Christian
submission, to the uproar. He was an hereditary chief in this quarter
of the island, and judge for life in the district of Partoowye.

There were several cases coming on; but the captain and girl were first
tried together. They were mixing freely with the crowd; and as it
afterwards turned out that everyone—no matter who—had a right to
address the court, for aught we knew they might have been arguing their
own case. At what precise moment the trial began it would be hard to
say. There was no swearing of witnesses, and no regular jury. Now and
then somebody leaped up and shouted out something which might have been
evidence; the rest, meanwhile, keeping up an incessant jabbering.
Presently the old judge himself began to get excited; and springing to
his feet, ran in among the crowd, wagging his tongue as hard as
anybody.

The tumult lasted about twenty minutes; and toward the end of it,
Captain Crash might have been seen, tranquilly regarding, from his
Honour’s platform, the judicial uproar, in which his fate was about
being decided.

The result of all this was that both he and the girl were found guilty.
The latter was adjudged to make six mats for the queen; and the former,
in consideration of his manifold offences, being deemed incorrigible,
was sentenced to eternal banishment from the island. Both these decrees
seemed to originate in the general hubbub. His Honour, however,
appeared to have considerable authority, and it was quite plain that
the decision received his approval.

The above penalties were by no means indiscriminately inflicted. The
missionaries have prepared a sort of penal tariff to facilitate
judicial proceedings. It costs so many days’ labour on the Broom Road
to indulge in the pleasures of the calabash; so many fathoms of stone
wall to steal a musket; and so on to the end of the catalogue. The
judge being provided with a book in which all these matters are
cunningly arranged, the thing is vastly convenient. For instance: a
crime is proved,—say bigamy; turn to letter B—and there you have it.
Bigamy:—forty days on the Broom Road, and twenty mats for the queen.
Read the passage aloud, and sentence is pronounced.

After taking part in the first trial, the other delinquents present
were put upon their own; in which, also, the convicted culprits seemed
to have quite as much to say as the rest. A rather strange proceeding;
but strictly in accordance with the glorious English principle, that
every man should be tried by his peers. They were all found guilty.




CHAPTER LXXX.
QUEEN POMAREE


It is well to learn something about people before being introduced to
them, and so we will here give some account of Pomaree and her family.

Every reader of Cook’s Voyages must remember “Otto,” who, in that
navigator’s time, was king of the larger peninsula of Tahiti.
Subsequently, assisted by the muskets of the Bounty’s men, he extended
his rule over the entire island. This Otto, before his death, had his
name changed into Pomaree, which has ever since been the royal
patronymic.

He was succeeded by his son, Pomaree II., the most famous prince in the
annals of Tahiti. Though a sad debauchee and drunkard, and even charged
with unnatural crimes, he was a great friend of the missionaries, and
one of their very first proselytes. During the religious wars into
which he was hurried by his zeal for the new faith, he was defeated and
expelled from the island. After a short exile he returned from Imeeo,
with an army of eight hundred warriors, and in the battle of Narii
routed the rebellious pagans with great slaughter, and reestablished
himself upon the throne. Thus, by force of arms, was Christianity
finally triumphant in Tahiti.

Pomaree II., dying in 1821, was succeeded by his infant son, under the
title of Pomaree III. This young prince survived his father but six
years; and the government then descended to his elder sister, Aimata,
the present queen, who is commonly called Pomaree Vahinee I., or the
first female Pomaree. Her majesty must be now upwards of thirty years
of age. She has been twice married. Her first husband was a son of the
old King of Tahar, an island about one hundred miles from Tahiti. This
proving an unhappy alliance, the pair were soon afterwards divorced.
The present husband of the queen is a chief of Imeeo.

The reputation of Pomaree is not what it ought to be. She, and also her
mother, were, for a long time, excommunicated members of the Church;
and the former, I believe, still is. Among other things, her conjugal
fidelity is far from being unquestioned. Indeed, it was upon this
ground chiefly that she was excluded from the communion of the Church.

Previous to her misfortunes she spent the greater portion of her time
sailing about from one island to another, attended by a licentious
court; and wherever she went all manner of games and festivities
celebrated her arrival.

She was always given to display. For several years the maintenance of a
regiment of household troops drew largely upon the royal exchequer.
They were trouserless fellows, in a uniform of calico shirts and
pasteboard hats; armed with muskets of all shapes and calibres, and
commanded by a great noisy chief, strutting it in a coat of fiery red.
These heroes escorted their mistress whenever she went abroad.

Some time ago, the queen received from her English sister, Victoria, a
very showy, though uneasy, head-dress—a crown; probably made to order
at some tinman’s in London. Having no idea of reserving so pretty a
bauble for coronation days, which come so seldom, her majesty sported
it whenever she appeared in public; and, to show her familiarity with
European customs, politely touched it to all foreigners of
distinction—whaling captains, and the like—whom she happened to meet in
her evening walk on the Broom Road.

The arrival and departure of royalty were always announced at the
palace by the court artilleryman—a fat old gentleman who, in a
prodigious hurry and perspiration, discharged minute fowling-pieces as
fast as he could load and fire the same.

The Tahitian princess leads her husband a hard life. Poor fellow! he
not only caught a queen, but a Tartar, when he married her. The style
by which he is addressed is rather significant—“Pomaree-Tanee”
(Pomaree’s man). All things considered, as appropriate a title for a
king-consort as could be hit upon.

If ever there were a henpecked husband, that man is the prince. One
day, his carasposa giving audience to a deputation from the captains of
the vessels lying in Papeetee, he ventured to make a suggestion which
was very displeasing to her. She turned round and, boxing his ears,
told him to go over to his beggarly island of Imeeo if he wanted to
give himself airs.

Cuffed and contemned, poor Tanee flies to the bottle, or rather to the
calabash, for solace. Like his wife and mistress, he drinks more than
he ought.

Six or seven years ago, when an American man-of-war was lying at
Papeetee, the town was thrown into the greatest commotion by a conjugal
assault and battery made upon the sacred person of Pomaree by her
intoxicated Tanee.

Captain Bob once told me the story. And by way of throwing more spirit
into the description, as well as to make up for his oral deficiencies,
the old man went through the accompanying action: myself being proxy
for the Queen of Tahiti.

It seems that, on a Sunday morning, being dismissed contemptuously from
the royal presence, Tanee was accosted by certain good fellows, friends
and boon companions, who condoled with him on his misfortunes—railed
against the queen, and finally dragged him away to an illicit vendor of
spirits, in whose house the party got gloriously mellow. In this state,
Pomaree Vahinee I. was the topic upon which all dilated—“A vixen of a
queen,” probably suggested one. “It’s infamous,” said another; “and I’d
have satisfaction,” cried a third. “And so I will!”—Tanee must have
hiccoughed; for off he went; and ascertaining that his royal half was
out riding, he mounted his horse and galloped after her.

Near the outskirts of the town, a cavalcade of women came cantering
toward him, in the centre of which was the object of his fury. Smiting
his beast right and left, he dashed in among them, completely
overturning one of the party, leaving her on the field, and dispersing
everybody else except Pomaree. Backing her horse dexterously, the
incensed queen heaped upon him every scandalous epithet she could think
of; until at last the enraged Tanee leaped out of his saddle, caught
Pomaree by her dress, and dragging her to the earth struck her
repeatedly in the face, holding on meanwhile by the hair of her head.
He was proceeding to strangle her on the spot, when the cries of the
frightened attendants brought a crowd of natives to the rescue, who
bore the nearly insensible queen away.

But his frantic rage was not yet sated. He ran to the palace; and
before it could be prevented, demolished a valuable supply of crockery,
a recent present from abroad. In the act of perpetrating some other
atrocity, he was seized from behind, and carried off with rolling eyes
and foaming at the mouth.

This is a fair example of a Tahitian in a passion. Though the mildest
of mortals in general, and hard to be roused, when once fairly up, he
is possessed with a thousand devils.

The day following, Tanee was privately paddled over to Imeeo in a
canoe; where, after remaining in banishment for a couple of weeks, he
was allowed to return, and once more give in his domestic adhesion.

Though Pomaree Vahinee I. be something of a Jezebel in private life, in
her public rule she is said to have been quite lenient and forbearing.
This was her true policy; for an hereditary hostility to her family had
always lurked in the hearts of many powerful chiefs, the descendants of
the old Kings of Taiarboo, dethroned by her grandfather Otoo. Chief
among these, and in fact the leader of his party, was Poofai; a bold,
able man, who made no secret of his enmity to the missionaries, and the
government which they controlled. But while events were occurring
calculated to favour the hopes of the disaffected and turbulent, the
arrival of the French gave a most unexpected turn to affairs.

During my sojourn in Tahiti, a report was rife—which I knew to
originate with what is generally called the “missionary party”—that
Poofai and some other chiefs of note had actually agreed, for a
stipulated bribe, to acquiesce in the appropriation of their country.
But subsequent events have rebutted the calumny. Several of these very
men have recently died in battle against the French.

Under the sovereignty of the Pomarees, the great chiefs of Tahiti were
something like the barons of King John. Holding feudal sway over their
patrimonial valleys, and on account of their descent, warmly beloved by
the people, they frequently cut off the royal revenues by refusing to
pay the customary tribute due from them as vassals.

The truth is, that with the ascendancy of the missionaries, the regal
office in Tahiti lost much of its dignity and influence. In the days of
Paganism, it was supported by all the power of a numerous priesthood,
and was solemnly connected with the entire superstitious idolatry of
the land. The monarch claimed to be a sort of bye-blow of Tararroa, the
Saturn of the Polynesian mythology, and cousin-german to inferior
deities. His person was thrice holy; if he entered an ordinary
dwelling, never mind for how short a time, it was demolished when he
left; no common mortal being thought worthy to inhabit it afterward.

“I’m a greater man than King George,” said the incorrigible young Otoo
to the first missionaries; “he rides on a horse, and I on a man.” Such
was the case. He travelled post through his dominions on the shoulders
of his subjects; and relays of mortal beings were provided in all the
valleys.

But alas! how times have changed; how transient human greatness. Some
years since, Pomaree Vahinee I., the granddaughter of the proud Otoo,
went into the laundry business; publicly soliciting, by her agents, the
washing of the linen belonging to the officers of ships touching in her
harbours.

It is a significant fact, and one worthy of record, that while the
influence of the English missionaries at Tahiti has tended to so great
a diminution of the regal dignity there, that of the American
missionaries at the Sandwich Islands has been purposely exerted to
bring about a contrary result.




CHAPTER LXXXI.
WE VISIT THE COURT


It was about the middle of the second month of the Hegira, and
therefore some five weeks after our arrival in Partoowye, that we at
last obtained admittance to the residence of the queen.

It happened thus. There was a Marquesan in the train of Pomaree who
officiated as nurse to her children. According to the Tahitian custom,
the royal youngsters are carried about until it requires no small
degree of strength to stand up under them. But Marbonna was just the
man for this—large and muscular, well made as a statue, and with an arm
like a degenerate Tahitian’s thigh.

Embarking at his native island as a sailor on board of a French whaler,
he afterward ran away from the ship at Tahiti; where, being seen and
admired by Pomaree, he had been prevailed upon to enlist in her
service.

Often, when visiting the grounds, we saw him walking about in the
shade, carrying two handsome boys, who encircled his neck with their
arms. Marbonna’s face, tattooed as it was in the ornate style of his
tribe, was as good as a picture-book to these young Pomarees. They
delighted to trace with their fingers the outlines of the strange
shapes there delineated.

The first time my eyes lighted upon the Marquesan, I knew his country
in a moment; and hailing him in his own language, he turned round,
surprised that a person so speaking should be a stranger. He proved to
be a native of Tior, a glen of Nukuheva. I had visited the place more
than once; and so, on the island of Imeeo, we met like old friends.

In my frequent conversations with him over the bamboo picket, I found
this islander a philosopher of nature—a wild heathen, moralizing upon
the vices and follies of the Christian court of Tahiti—a savage,
scorning the degeneracy of the people among whom fortune had thrown
him.

I was amazed at the national feelings of the man. No European, when
abroad, could speak of his country with more pride than Marbonna. He
assured me, again and again, that so soon as he had obtained sufficient
money to purchase twenty muskets, and as many bags of powder, he was
going to return to a place with which Imeeo was not worthy to be
compared.

It was Marbonna who, after one or two unsuccessful attempts, at last
brought about our admission into the queen’s grounds. Through a
considerable crowd he conducted us along the pier to where an old man
was sitting, to whom he introduced us as a couple of “karhowrees” of
his acquaintance, anxious to see the sights of the palace. The
venerable chamberlain stared at us, and shook his head: the doctor,
thinking he wanted a fee, placed a plug of tobacco in his hand. This
was ingratiating, and we were permitted to pass on. Upon the point of
entering one of the houses, Marbonna’s name was shouted in half-a-dozen
different directions, and he was obliged to withdraw.

Thus left at the very threshold to shift for ourselves, my companion’s
assurance stood us in good stead. He stalked right in, and I followed.
The place was full of women, who, instead of exhibiting the surprise we
expected, accosted us as cordially as if we had called to take our
Souchong with them by express invitation. In the first place, nothing
would do but we must each devour a calabash of “poee,” and several
roasted bananas. Pipes were then lighted, and a brisk conversation
ensued.

These ladies of the court, if not very polished, were surprisingly free
and easy in their manners; quite as much so as King Charles’s beauties.
There was one of them—an arch little miss, who could converse with us
pretty fluently—to whom we strove to make ourselves particularly
agreeable, with the view of engaging her services as cicerone.

As such, she turned out to be everything we could desire. No one
disputing her will, every place was entered without ceremony, curtains
brushed aside, mats lifted, and each nook and corner explored. Whether
the little damsel carried her mistress’ signet, that everything opened
to her thus, I know not; but Marbonna himself, the bearer of infants,
could not have been half so serviceable.

Among other houses which we visited, was one of large size and fine
exterior; the special residence of a European—formerly the mate of a
merchant vessel,—who had done himself the honour of marrying into the
Pomaree family. The lady he wedded being a near kinswoman of the queen,
he became a permanent member of her majesty’s household. This
adventurer rose late, dressed theatrically in calico and trinkets,
assumed a dictatorial tone in conversation, and was evidently upon
excellent terms with himself.

We found him reclining on a mat, smoking a reed-pipe of tobacco, in the
midst of an admiring circle of chiefs and ladies. He must have noticed
our approach; but instead of rising and offering civilities, he went on
talking and smoking, without even condescending to look at us.

“His Highness feels his ‘poee,’” carelessly observed the doctor. The
rest of the company gave us the ordinary salutation, our guide
announcing us beforehand.

In answer to our earnest requests to see the queen, we were now
conducted to an edifice, by far the most spacious, in the inclosure. It
was at least one hundred and fifty feet in length, very wide, with low
eaves, and an exceedingly steep roof of pandannas leaves. There were
neither doors nor windows—nothing along the sides but the slight posts
supporting the rafters. Between these posts, curtains of fine matting
and tappa were rustling, all round; some of them were festooned, or
partly withdrawn, so as to admit light and air, and afford a glimpse
now and then of what was going on within.

Pushing aside one of the screens, we entered. The apartment was one
immense hall; the long and lofty ridge-pole fluttering with fringed
matting and tassels, full forty feet from the ground. Lounges of mats,
piled one upon another, extended on either side: while here and there
were slight screens, forming as many recesses, where groups of
natives—all females—were reclining at their evening meal.

As we advanced, these various parties ceased their buzzing, and in
explanation of our appearance among them, listened to a few cabalistic
words from our guide.

The whole scene was a strange one; but what most excited our surprise
was the incongruous assemblage of the most costly objects from all
quarters of the globe. Cheek by jowl, they lay beside the rudest native
articles, without the slightest attempt at order. Superb writing-desks
of rosewood, inlaid with silver and mother-of-pearl; decanters and
goblets of cut glass; embossed volumes of plates; gilded candelabra;
sets of globes and mathematical instruments; the finest porcelain;
richly-mounted sabres and fowling-pieces; laced hats and sumptuous
garments of all sorts, with numerous other matters of European
manufacture, were strewn about among greasy calabashes half-filled with
“poee,” rolls of old tappa and matting, paddles and fish-spears, and
the ordinary furniture of a Tahitian dwelling.

All the articles first mentioned were, doubtless, presents from foreign
powers. They were more or less injured: the fowling-pieces and swords
were rusted; the finest woods were scratched; and a folio volume of
Hogarth lay open, with a cocoa-nut shell of some musty preparation
capsized among the miscellaneous furniture of the Rake’s apartment,
where that inconsiderate young gentleman is being measured for a coat.

While we were amusing ourselves in this museum of curiosities, our
conductor plucked us by the sleeve, and whispered, “Pomaree! Pomaree!
armai kow kow.”

“She is coming to sup, then,” said the doctor, staring in the direction
indicated. “What say you, Paul, suppose we step up?” Just then a
curtain near by lifted, and from a private building a few yards distant
the queen entered, unattended.

She wore a loose gown of blue silk, with two rich shawls, one red and
the other yellow, tied about her neck. Her royal majesty was
barefooted.

She was about the ordinary size, rather matronly; her features not very
handsome; her mouth, voluptuous; but there was a care-worn expression
in her face, probably attributable to her late misfortunes. From her
appearance, one would judge her about forty; but she is not so old.

As the queen approached one of the recesses, her attendants hurried up,
escorted her in, and smoothed the mats on which she at last reclined.
Two girls soon appeared, carrying their mistress’ repast; and then,
surrounded by cut-glass and porcelain, and jars of sweetmeats and
confections, Pomaree Vahinee I., the titular Queen of Tahiti, ate fish
and “poee” out of her native calabashes, disdaining either knife or
spoon.

“Come on,” whispered Long Ghost, “let’s have an audience at once;” and
he was on the point of introducing himself, when our guide, quite
alarmed, held him back and implored silence. The other natives also
interfered, and, as he was pressing forward, raised such an outcry that
Pomaree lifted her eyes and saw us for the first.

She seemed surprised and offended, and, issuing an order in a
commanding tone to several of her women, waved us out of the house.
Summary as the dismissal was, court etiquette, no doubt, required our
compliance. We withdrew; making a profound inclination as we
disappeared behind the tappa arras.

We departed the ground without seeing Marbonna; and previous to
vaulting over the picket, feed our pretty guide after a fashion of our
own. Looking round a few moments after, we saw the damsel escorted back
by two men, who seemed to have been sent after her. I trust she
received nothing more than a reprimand.

The next day Po-Po informed us that strict orders had been issued to
admit no strangers within the palace precincts.




CHAPTER LXXXII.
WHICH ENDS THE BOOK


Disappointed in going to court, we determined upon going to sea. It
would never do, longer to trespass on Po-Po’s hospitality; and then,
weary somewhat of life in Imeeo, like all sailors ashore, I at last
pined for the billows.

Now, if her crew were to be credited, the Leviathan was not the craft
to our mind. But I had seen the captain, and liked him. He was an
uncommonly tall, robust, fine-looking man, in the prime of life. There
was a deep crimson spot in the middle of each sunburnt cheek, doubtless
the effect of his sea-potations. He was a Vineyarder, or native of the
island of Martha’s Vineyard (adjoining Nantucket), and—I would have
sworn it—a sailor, and no tyrant.

Previous to this, we had rather avoided the Leviathan’s men, when they
came ashore; but now, we purposely threw ourselves in their way, in
order to learn more of the vessel.

We became acquainted with the third mate, a Prussian, and an old
merchant-seaman—a right jolly fellow, with a face like a ruby. We took
him to Po-Po’s, and gave him a dinner of baked pig and breadfruit; with
pipes and tobacco for dessert. The account he gave us of the ship
agreed with my own surmises. A cosier old craft never floated; and the
captain was the finest man in the world. There was plenty to eat, too;
and, at sea, nothing to do but sit on the windlass and sail. The only
bad trait about the vessel was this: she had been launched under some
baleful star; and so was a luckless ship in the fishery. She dropped
her boats into the brine often enough, and they frequently got fast to
the whales; but lance and harpoon almost invariably “drew” when darted
by the men of the Leviathan. But what of that? We would have all the
sport of chasing the monsters, with none of the detestable work which
follows their capture. So, hurrah for the coast of Japan! Thither the
ship was bound.

A word now about the hard stories we heard the first time we visited
the ship. They were nothing but idle fictions, got up by the sailors
for the purpose of frightening us away, so as to oblige the captain,
who was in want of more hands, to lie the longer in a pleasant harbour.

The next time the Vineyarder came ashore, we flung ourselves in his
path. When informed of our desire to sail with him, he wanted to know
our history; and, above all, what countrymen we were. We said that we
had left a whaler in Tahiti, some time previous; and, since then, had
been—in the most praiseworthy manner—employed upon a plantation. As for
our country, sailors belong to no nation in particular; we were, on
this occasion, both Yankees. Upon this he looked decidedly incredulous;
and freely told us that he verily believed we were both from Sydney.

Be it known here that American sea captains, in the Pacific, are
mortally afraid of these Sydney gentry; who, to tell the truth,
wherever known, are in excessively bad odour. Is there a mutiny on
board a ship in the South Seas, ten to one a Sydney man is the
ringleader. Ashore, these fellows are equally riotous.

It was on this account that we were anxious to conceal the fact of our
having belonged to the Julia, though it annoyed me much, thus to deny
the dashing little craft. For the same reason, also, the doctor fibbed
about his birthplace.

Unfortunately, one part of our raiment—Arfretee’s blue frocks—we deemed
a sort of collateral evidence against us. For, curiously enough, an
American sailor is generally distinguished by his red frock; and an
English tar by his blue one: thus reversing the national colours. The
circumstance was pointed out by the captain; and we quickly explained
the anomaly. But, in vain: he seemed inveterately prejudiced against
us; and, in particular, eyed the doctor most distrustfully.

By way of propping the tatter’s pretensions, I was throwing out a hint
concerning Kentucky, as a land of tall men, when our Vine-yarder turned
away abruptly, and desired to hear nothing more. It was evident that he
took Long Ghost for an exceedingly problematical character.

Perceiving this, I resolved to see what a private interview would do.
So, one afternoon, I found the captain smoking a pipe in the dwelling
of a portly old native—one Mai-Mai—who, for a reasonable compensation,
did the honours of Partoowye to illustrious strangers.

His guest had just risen from a sumptuous meal of baked pig and taro
pudding; and the remnants of the repast were still visible. Two reeking
bottles, also, with their necks wrenched off, lay upon the mat. All
this was encouraging; for, after a good dinner, one feels affluent and
amiable, and peculiarly open to conviction. So, at all events, I found
the noble Vineyarder.

I began by saying that I called for the purpose of setting him right
touching certain opinions of his concerning the place of my nativity:—I
was an American—thank heaven!—and wanted to convince him of the fact.

After looking me in the eye for some time, and, by so doing, revealing
an obvious unsteadiness in his own visual organs, he begged me to reach
forth my arm. I did so; wondering what upon earth that useful member
had to do with the matter in hand.

He placed his fingers upon my wrist; and holding them there for a
moment, sprang to his feet, and, with much enthusiasm, pronounced me a
Yankee, every beat of my pulse!

“Here, Mai-Mai!” he cried, “another bottle!” And, when it came, with
one stroke of a knife, he summarily beheaded it, and commanded me to
drain it to the bottom. He then told me that if I would come on board
his vessel the following morning, I would find the ship’s articles on
the cabin transom.

This was getting along famously. But what was to become of the doctor?

I forthwith made an adroit allusion to my long friend. But it was worse
than useless. The Vineyarder swore he would have nothing to do with
him—he (my long friend) was a “bird” from Sydney, and nothing would
make him (the man of little faith) believe otherwise.

I could not help loving the free-hearted captain; but indignant at this
most unaccountable prejudice against my comrade, I abruptly took leave.

Upon informing the doctor of the result of the interview, he was
greatly amused; and laughingly declared that the Vineyarder must be a
penetrating fellow. He then insisted upon my going to sea in the ship,
since he well knew how anxious I was to leave. As for himself, on
second thoughts, he was no sailor; and although “lands—’ men” very
often compose part of a whaler’s crew, he did not quite relish the idea
of occupying a position so humble. In short, he had made up his mind to
tarry awhile in Imeeo.

I turned the matter over: and at last decided upon quitting the island.
The impulse urging me to sea once more, and the prospect of eventually
reaching home, were too much to be resisted; especially as the
Leviathan, so comfortable a craft, was now bound on her last whaling
cruise, and, in little more than a year’s time, would be going round
Cape Horn.

I did not, however, covenant to remain in the vessel for the residue of
the voyage; which would have been needlessly binding myself. I merely
stipulated for the coming cruise, leaving my subsequent movements
unrestrained; for there was no knowing that I might not change my mind,
and prefer journeying home by short and easy stages.

The next day I paddled off to the ship, signed and sealed, and stepped
ashore with my “advance”—fifteen Spanish dollars—tasseling the ends of
my neck-handkerchief.

I forced half of the silver on Long Ghost; and having little use for
the remainder, would have given it to Po-Po as some small return for
his kindness; but, although he well knew the value of the coin, not a
dollar would he accept.

In three days’ time the Prussian came to Po-Po’s, and told us that the
captain, having made good the number of his crew by shipping several
islanders, had determined upon sailing with the land breeze at dawn the
following morning. These tidings were received in the afternoon. The
doctor immediately disappeared, returning soon after with a couple of
flasks of wine concealed in the folds of his frock. Through the agency
of the Marquesan, he had purchased them from an understrapper of the
court.

I prevailed upon Po-Po to drink a parting shell; and even little Loo,
actually looking conscious that one of her hopeless admirers was about
leaving Partoowye for ever, sipped a few drops from a folded leaf. As
for the warm-hearted Arfretee, her grief was unbounded. She even
besought me to spend my last night under her own palm-thatch; and then,
in the morning, she would herself paddle me off to the ship.

But this I would not consent to; and so, as something to remember her
by, she presented me with a roll of fine matting, and another of tappa.
These gifts placed in my hammock, I afterward found very agreeable in
the warm latitudes to which we were bound; nor did they fail to awaken
most grateful remembrances.

About nightfall, we broke away from this generous-hearted household,
and hurried down to the water.

It was a mad, merry night among the sailors; they had on tap a small
cask of wine, procured in the same way as the doctor’s flasks.

An hour or two after midnight, everything was noiseless; but when the
first streak of the dawn showed itself over the mountains, a sharp
voice hailed the forecastle, and ordered the ship unmoored.

The anchors came up cheerily; the sails were soon set; and with the
early breath of the tropical morning, fresh and fragrant from the
hillsides, we slowly glided down the bay, and were swept through the
opening in the reef. Presently we “hove to,” and the canoes came
alongside to take off the islanders who had accompanied us thus far. As
he stepped over the side, I shook the doctor long and heartily by the
hand. I have never seen or heard of him since.

Crowding all sail, we braced the yards square; and, the breeze
freshening, bowled straight away from the land. Once more the sailor’s
cradle rocked under me, and I found myself rolling in my gait.

By noon, the island had gone down in the horizon; and all before us was
the wide Pacific.

MARDI:
AND A VOYAGE THITHER

By Herman Melville

In Two Volumes

Vol. I

1864




DEDICATED
TO
My Brother,
ALLAN MELVILLE.




CONTENTS

 PREFACE
 MARDI
 CHAPTER I — Foot in Stirrup
 CHAPTER II — A Calm
 CHAPTER III — A King for a Comrade
 CHAPTER IV — A Chat in the Clouds
 CHAPTER V — Seats secured and Portmanteaus packed
 CHAPTER VI — Eight Bells
 CHAPTER VII — A Pause
 CHAPTER VIII — They push off, Velis et Remis
 CHAPTER IX — The Watery World is all before Them
 CHAPTER X — They arrange their Canopies And Lounges, and try to Make Things comfortable
 CHAPTER XI — Jarl afflicted with the Lockjaw
 CHAPTER XII — More about being in an open Boat
 CHAPTER XIII — Of the Chondropterygii, and other uncouth Hordes infesting the South Seas
 CHAPTER XIV — Jarl’s Misgivings
 CHAPTER XV — A Stitch in time saves Nine
 CHAPTER XVI — They are Becalmed
 CHAPTER XVII — In high Spirits, they push on for the Terra Incognita
 CHAPTER XVIII — My Lord Shark and his Pages
 CHAPTER XIX — Who goes there?
 CHAPTER XX — Noises and Portents
 CHAPTER XXI — Man ho!
 CHAPTER XXII — What befel the Brigantine at the Pearl Shell Islands
 CHAPTER XXIII — Sailing from the Island they pillage the Cabin
 CHAPTER XXIV — Dedicated to the College of Physicians and Surgeons
 CHAPTER XXV — Peril A Peace-Maker
 CHAPTER XXVI — Containing a Pennyweight Of Philosophy
 CHAPTER XXVII — In which the past History of the Parki is concluded
 CHAPTER XXVIII — Suspicions laid, and something about the Calmuc
 CHAPTER XXIX — What they lighted upon in further searching the Craft, and the Resolution they came to
 CHAPTER XXX — Hints for a full length of Samoa
 CHAPTER XXXI — Rovings Alow and Aloft
 CHAPTER XXXII — Xiphius Platypterus
 CHAPTER XXXIII — Otard
 CHAPTER XXXIV — How they steered on their Way
 CHAPTER XXXV — Ah, Annatoo!
 CHAPTER XXXVI — The Parki gives up the Ghost
 CHAPTER XXXVII — Once more they take to the Chamois
 CHAPTER XXXVIII — The Sea on Fire
 CHAPTER XXXIX — They fall in with Strangers
 CHAPTER XL — Sire and Sons
 CHAPTER XLI — A Fray
 CHAPTER XLII — Remorse
 CHAPTER XLIII — The Tent entered
 CHAPTER XLIV — Away!
 CHAPTER XLV — Reminiscences
 CHAPTER XLVI — The Chamois with a roving Commission
 CHAPTER XLVII — Yillah, Jarl, and Samoa
 CHAPTER XLVIII — Something under the Surface
 CHAPTER XLIX — Yillah
 CHAPTER L — Yillah in Ardair
 CHAPTER LI — The Dream begins to fade
 CHAPTER LII — World ho!
 CHAPTER LIII — The Chamois Ashore
 CHAPTER LIV — A Gentleman from the Sun
 CHAPTER LV — Tiffin in a Temple
 CHAPTER LVI — King Media a Host
 CHAPTER LVII — Taji takes Counsel with himself
 CHAPTER LVIII — Mardi by Night and Yillah by Day
 CHAPTER LIX — Their Morning Meal
 CHAPTER LX — Belshazzar on the Bench
 CHAPTER LXI — An Incognito
 CHAPTER LXII — Taji retires from the World
 CHAPTER LXIII — Odo and its Lord
 CHAPTER LXIV — Yillah a Phantom
 CHAPTER LXV — Taji makes three Acquaintances
 CHAPTER LXVI — With a fair Wind, at Sunrise they sail
 CHAPTER LXVII — Little King Peepi
 CHAPTER LXVIII — How Teeth were regarded in Valapee
 CHAPTER LXIX — The Company discourse, and Braid-Beard rehearses a Legend
 CHAPTER LXX — The Minstrel leads off with a Paddle-Song; and a Message is received from Abroad
 CHAPTER LXXI — They land upon the Island of Juam
 CHAPTER LXXII — A Book from the Chronicles of Mohi
 CHAPTER LXXIII — Something more of the Prince
 CHAPTER LXXIV — Advancing deeper into the Vale, they encounter Donjalolo
 CHAPTER LXXV — Time and Temples
 CHAPTER LXXVI — A pleasant Place for a Lounge
 CHAPTER LXXVII — The House of the Afternoon
 CHAPTER LXXVIII — Babbalanja solus
 CHAPTER LXXIX — The Center of many Circumferences
 CHAPTER LXXX — Donjalolo in the Bosom of his Family
 CHAPTER LXXXI — Wherein Babbalanja relates the Adventure of one Karkeke in the Land of Shades
 CHAPTER LXXXII — How Donjalolo, sent Agents to the Surrounding Isles; with the Result
 CHAPTER LXXXIII — They visit the Tributary Islets
 CHAPTER LXXXIV — Taji sits down to Dinner with five-And-Twenty Kings, and a royal Time they have
 CHAPTER LXXXV — After Dinner
 CHAPTER LXXXVI — Of those Scamps the Plujii
 CHAPTER LXXXVII — Nora-Bamma
 CHAPTER LXXXVIII — In a Calm, Hautia’s Heralds approach
 CHAPTER LXXXIX — Braid-Beard rehearses the Origin of the Isle of Rogues
 CHAPTER XC — Rare Sport at Ohonoo
 CHAPTER XCI — Of King Uhia and his Subjects
 CHAPTER XCII — The God Keevi and the Precipice of Mondo
 CHAPTER XCIII — Babbalanja steps in between Mohi and Yoomy; and Yoomy relates a Legend
 CHAPTER XCIV — Of that jolly old Lord, Borabolla; and that jolly Island of his, Mondoldo; and of the Fish-Ponds, and the Hereafters of Fish
 CHAPTER XCV — That jolly old Lord Borabolla laughs on both Sides of his Face
 CHAPTER XCVI — Samoa a Surgeon
 CHAPTER XCVII — Faith and Knowledge
 CHAPTER XCVIII — The Tale of a Traveler
 CHAPTER XCIX — “Marnee Ora, Ora Marnee”
 CHAPTER C — The Pursuer himself is pursued
 CHAPTER CI — The Iris
 CHAPTER CII — They depart from Mondoldo
 CHAPTER CIII — As they sail
 CHAPTER CIV — Wherein Babbalanja broaches a diabolical Theory, and in his Own Person proves it




PREFACE


Not long ago, having published two narratives of voyages in the
Pacific, which, in many quarters, were received with incredulity, the
thought occurred to me, of indeed writing a romance of Polynesian
adventure, and publishing it as such; to see whether, the fiction might
not, possibly, be received for a verity: in some degree the reverse of
my previous experience.

This thought was the germ of others, which have resulted in Mardi. New
York, January, 1849.




MARDI




CHAPTER I.
Foot In Stirrup


We are off! The courses and topsails are set: the coral-hung anchor
swings from the bow: and together, the three royals are given to the
breeze, that follows us out to sea like the baying of a hound. Out
spreads the canvas—alow, aloft-boom-stretched, on both sides, with many
a stun’ sail; till like a hawk, with pinions poised, we shadow the sea
with our sails, and reelingly cleave the brine.

But whence, and whither wend ye, mariners?

We sail from Ravavai, an isle in the sea, not very far northward from
the tropic of Capricorn, nor very far westward from Pitcairn’s island,
where the mutineers of the Bounty settled. At Ravavai I had stepped
ashore some few months previous; and now was embarked on a cruise for
the whale, whose brain enlightens the world.

And from Ravavai we sail for the Gallipagos, otherwise called the
Enchanted Islands, by reason of the many wild currents and eddies there
met.

Now, round about those isles, which Dampier once trod, where the
Spanish bucaniers once hived their gold moidores, the Cachalot, or
sperm whale, at certain seasons abounds.

But thither, from Ravavai, your craft may not fly, as flies the
sea-gull, straight to her nest. For, owing to the prevalence of the
trade winds, ships bound to the northeast from the vicinity of Ravavai
are fain to take something of a circuit; a few thousand miles or so.
First, in pursuit of the variable winds, they make all haste to the
south; and there, at length picking up a stray breeze, they stand for
the main: then, making their easting, up helm, and away down the coast,
toward the Line.

This round-about way did the Arcturion take; and in all conscience a
weary one it was. Never before had the ocean appeared so monotonous;
thank fate, never since.

But bravo! in two weeks’ time, an event. Out of the gray of the
morning, and right ahead, as we sailed along, a dark object rose out of
the sea; standing dimly before us, mists wreathing and curling aloft,
and creamy breakers frothing round its base.—We turned aside, and, at
length, when day dawned, passed Massafuero. With a glass, we spied two
or three hermit goats winding down to the sea, in a ravine; and
presently, a signal: a tattered flag upon a summit beyond. Well
knowing, however, that there was nobody on the island but two or three
noose-fulls of runaway convicts from Chili, our captain had no mind to
comply with their invitation to land. Though, haply, he may have erred
in not sending a boat off with his card.

A few days more and we “took the trades.” Like favors snappishly
conferred, they came to us, as is often the case, in a very sharp
squall; the shock of which carried away one of our spars; also our fat
old cook off his legs; depositing him plump in the scuppers to leeward.

In good time making the desired longitude upon the equator, a few
leagues west of the Gallipagos, we spent several weeks chassezing
across the Line, to and fro, in unavailing search for our prey. For
some of their hunters believe, that whales, like the silver ore in
Peru, run in veins through the ocean. So, day after day, daily; and
week after week, weekly, we traversed the self-same longitudinal
intersection of the self-same Line; till we were almost ready to swear
that we felt the ship strike every time her keel crossed that imaginary
locality.

At length, dead before the equatorial breeze, we threaded our way
straight along the very Line itself. Westward sailing; peering right,
and peering left, but seeing naught.

It was during this weary time, that I experienced the first symptoms of
that bitter impatience of our monotonous craft, which ultimately led to
the adventures herein recounted.

But hold you! Not a word against that rare old ship, nor its crew. The
sailors were good fellows all, the half, score of pagans we had shipped
at the islands included. Nevertheless, they were not precisely to my
mind. There was no soul a magnet to mine; none with whom to mingle
sympathies; save in deploring the calms with which we were now and then
overtaken; or in hailing the breeze when it came. Under other and
livelier auspices the tarry knaves might have developed qualities more
attractive. Had we sprung a leak, been “stove” by a whale, or been
blessed with some despot of a captain against whom to stir up some
spirited revolt, these shipmates of mine might have proved limber lads,
and men of mettle. But as it was, there was naught to strike fire from
their steel.

There were other things, also, tending to make my lot on ship-board
very hard to be borne. True, the skipper himself was a trump; stood
upon no quarter-deck dignity; and had a tongue for a sailor. Let me do
him justice, furthermore: he took a sort of fancy for me in particular;
was sociable, nay, loquacious, when I happened to stand at the helm.
But what of that? Could he talk sentiment or philosophy? Not a bit. His
library was eight inches by four: Bowditch, and Hamilton Moore.

And what to me, thus pining for some one who could page me a quotation
from Burton on Blue Devils; what to me, indeed, were flat repetitions
of long-drawn yarns, and the everlasting stanzas of Black-eyed Susan
sung by our full forecastle choir? Staler than stale ale.

Ay, ay, Arcturion! I say it in no malice, but thou wast exceedingly
dull. Not only at sailing: hard though it was, that I could have borne;
but in every other respect. The days went slowly round and round,
endless and uneventful as cycles in space. Time, and time- pieces; How
many centuries did my hammock tell, as pendulum-like it swung to the
ship’s dull roll, and ticked the hours and ages. Sacred forever be the
Arcturion’s fore-hatch—alas! sea-moss is over it now—and rusty forever
the bolts that held together that old sea hearth-stone, about which we
so often lounged. Nevertheless, ye lost and leaden hours, I will rail
at ye while life lasts.

Well: weeks, chronologically speaking, went by. Bill Marvel’s stories
were told over and over again, till the beginning and end dovetailed
into each other, and were united for aye. Ned Ballad’s songs were sung
till the echoes lurked in the very tops, and nested in the bunts of the
sails. My poor patience was clean gone.

But, at last after some time sailing due westward we quitted the Line
in high disgust; having seen there, no sign of a whale.

But whither now? To the broiling coast of Papua? That region of
sun-strokes, typhoons, and bitter pulls after whales unattainable. Far
worse. We were going, it seemed, to illustrate the Whistonian theory
concerning the damned and the comets;—hurried from equinoctial heats to
arctic frosts. To be short, with the true fickleness of his tribe, our
skipper had abandoned all thought of the Cachalot. In desperation, he
was bent upon bobbing for the Right whale on the Nor’-West Coast and in
the Bay of Kamschatska.

To the uninitiated in the business of whaling, my feelings at this
juncture may perhaps be hard to understand. But this much let me say:
that Right whaling on the Nor’-West Coast, in chill and dismal fogs,
the sullen inert monsters rafting the sea all round like Hartz forest
logs on the Rhine, and submitting to the harpoon like half-stunned
bullocks to the knife; this horrid and indecent Right whaling, I say,
compared to a spirited hunt for the gentlemanly Cachalot in southern
and more genial seas, is as the butchery of white bears upon blank
Greenland icebergs to zebra hunting in Caffraria, where the lively
quarry bounds before you through leafy glades.

Now, this most unforeseen determination on the part of my captain to
measure the arctic circle was nothing more nor less than a tacit
contravention of the agreement between us. That agreement needs not to
be detailed. And having shipped but for a single cruise, I had embarked
aboard his craft as one might put foot in stirrup for a day’s following
of the hounds. And here, Heaven help me, he was going to carry me off
to the Pole! And on such a vile errand too! For there was something
degrading in it. Your true whaleman glories in keeping his harpoon
unspotted by blood of aught but Cachalot. By my halidome, it touched
the knighthood of a tar. Sperm and spermaceti! It was unendurable.

“Captain,” said I, touching my sombrero to him as I stood at the wheel
one day, “It’s very hard to carry me off this way to purgatory. I
shipped to go elsewhere.”

“Yes, and so did I,” was his reply. “But it can’t be helped. Sperm
whales are not to be had. We’ve been out now three years, and something
or other must be got; for the ship is hungry for oil, and her hold a
gulf to look into. But cheer up my boy; once in the Bay of Kamschatka,
and we’ll be all afloat with what we want, though it be none of the
best.”

Worse and worse! The oleaginous prospect extended into an immensity of
Macassar. “Sir,” said I, “I did not ship for it; put me ashore
somewhere, I beseech.” He stared, but no answer vouchsafed; and for a
moment I thought I had roused the domineering spirit of the
sea-captain, to the prejudice of the more kindly nature of the man.

But not so. Taking three turns on the deck, he placed his hand on the
wheel, and said, “Right or wrong, my lad, go with us you must. Putting
you ashore is now out of the question. I make no port till this ship is
full to the combings of her hatchways. However, you may leave her if
you can.” And so saying he entered his cabin, like Julius Caesar into
his tent.

He may have meant little by it, but that last sentence rung in my ear
like a bravado. It savored of the turnkey’s compliments to the prisoner
in Newgate, when he shoots to the bolt on him.

“Leave the ship if I can!” Leave the ship when neither sail nor shore
was in sight! Ay, my fine captain, stranger things have been done. For
on board that very craft, the old Arcturion, were four tall fellows,
whom two years previous our skipper himself had picked up in an open
boat, far from the farthest shoal. To be sure, they spun a long yarn
about being the only survivors of an Indiaman burnt down to the water’s
edge. But who credited their tale? Like many others, they were keepers
of a secret: had doubtless contracted a disgust for some ugly craft
still afloat and hearty, and stolen away from her, off soundings. Among
seamen in the Pacific such adventures not seldom occur. Nor are they
accounted great wonders. They are but incidents, not events, in the
career of the brethren of the order of South Sea rovers. For what
matters it, though hundreds of miles from land, if a good whale-boat be
under foot, the Trades behind, and mild, warm seas before? And herein
lies the difference between the Atlantic and Pacific:—that once within
the Tropics, the bold sailor who has a mind to quit his ship round Cape
Horn, waits not for port. He regards that ocean as one mighty harbor.

Nevertheless, the enterprise hinted at was no light one; and I resolved
to weigh well the chances. It’s worth noticing, this way we all have of
pondering for ourselves the enterprise, which, for others, we hold a
bagatelle.

My first thoughts were of the boat to be obtained, and the right or
wrong of abstracting it, under the circumstances. But to split no hairs
on this point, let me say, that were I placed in the same situation
again, I would repeat the thing I did then. The captain well knew that
he was going to detain me unlawfully: against our agreement; and it was
he himself who threw out the very hint, which I merely adopted, with
many thanks to him.

In some such willful mood as this, I went aloft one day, to stand my
allotted two hours at the mast-head. It was toward the close of a day,
serene and beautiful. There I stood, high upon the mast, and away,
away, illimitably rolled the ocean beneath. Where we then were was
perhaps the most unfrequented and least known portion of these seas.
Westward, however, lay numerous groups of islands, loosely laid down
upon the charts, and invested with all the charms of dream-land. But
soon these regions would be past; the mild equatorial breeze exchanged
for cold, fierce squalls, and all the horrors of northern voyaging.

I cast my eyes downward to the brown planks of the dull, plodding ship,
silent from stem to stern; then abroad.

In the distance what visions were spread! The entire western horizon
high piled with gold and crimson clouds; airy arches, domes, and
minarets; as if the yellow, Moorish sun were setting behind some vast
Alhambra. Vistas seemed leading to worlds beyond. To and fro, and all
over the towers of this Nineveh in the sky, flew troops of birds.
Watching them long, one crossed my sight, flew through a low arch, and
was lost to view. My spirit must have sailed in with it; for directly,
as in a trance, came upon me the cadence of mild billows laving a beach
of shells, the waving of boughs, and the voices of maidens, and the
lulled beatings of my own dissolved heart, all blended together.

Now, all this, to be plain, was but one of the many visions one has up
aloft. But coming upon me at this time, it wrought upon me so, that
thenceforth my desire to quit the Arcturion became little short of a
frenzy.




CHAPTER II.
A Calm


Next day there was a calm, which added not a little to my impatience of
the ship. And, furthermore, by certain nameless associations revived in
me my old impressions upon first witnessing as a landsman this
phenomenon of the sea. Those impressions may merit a page.

To a landsman a calm is no joke. It not only revolutionizes his
abdomen, but unsettles his mind; tempts him to recant his belief in the
eternal fitness of things; in short, almost makes an infidel of him.

At first he is taken by surprise, never having dreamt of a state of
existence where existence itself seems suspended. He shakes himself in
his coat, to see whether it be empty or no. He closes his eyes, to test
the reality of the glassy expanse. He fetches a deep breath, by way of
experiment, and for the sake of witnessing the effect. If a reader of
books, Priestley on Necessity occurs to him; and he believes in that
old Sir Anthony Absolute to the very last chapter. His faith in Malte
Brun, however, begins to fail; for the geography, which from boyhood he
had implicitly confided in, always assured him, that though expatiating
all over the globe, the sea was at least margined by land. That over
against America, for example, was Asia. But it is a calm, and he grows
madly skeptical.

To his alarmed fancy, parallels and meridians become emphatically what
they are merely designated as being: imaginary lines drawn round the
earth’s surface.

The log assures him that he is in such a place; but the log is a liar;
for no place, nor any thing possessed of a local angularity, is to be
lighted upon in the watery waste.

At length horrible doubts overtake him as to the captain’s competency
to navigate his ship. The ignoramus must have lost his way, and drifted
into the outer confines of creation, the region of the everlasting
lull, introductory to a positive vacuity.

Thoughts of eternity thicken. He begins to feel anxious concerning his
soul.

The stillness of the calm is awful. His voice begins to grow strange
and portentous. He feels it in him like something swallowed too big for
the esophagus. It keeps up a sort of involuntary interior humming in
him, like a live beetle. His cranium is a dome full of reverberations.
The hollows of his very bones are as whispering galleries. He is afraid
to speak loud, lest he be stunned; like the man in the bass drum.

But more than all else is the consciousness of his utter helplessness.
Succor or sympathy there is none. Penitence for embarking avails not.
The final satisfaction of despairing may not be his with a relish. Vain
the idea of idling out the calm. He may sleep if he can, or purposely
delude himself into a crazy fancy, that he is merely at leisure. All
this he may compass; but he may not lounge; for to lounge is to be
idle; to be idle implies an absence of any thing to do; whereas there
is a calm to be endured: enough to attend to, Heaven knows.

His physical organization, obviously intended for locomotion, becomes a
fixture; for where the calm leaves him, there he remains. Even his
undoubted vested rights, comprised in his glorious liberty of volition,
become as naught. For of what use? He wills to go: to get away from the
calm: as ashore he would avoid the plague. But he can not; and how
foolish to revolve expedients. It is more hopeless than a bad marriage
in a land where there is no Doctors’ Commons. He has taken the ship to
wife, for better or for worse, for calm or for gale; and she is not to
be shuffled off. With yards akimbo, she says unto him scornfully, as
the old beldam said to the little dwarf:—“Help yourself”

And all this, and more than this, is a calm.




CHAPTER III.
A King For A Comrade


At the time I now write of, we must have been something more than sixty
degrees to the west of the Gallipagos. And having attained a desirable
longitude, we were standing northward for our arctic destination:
around us one wide sea.

But due west, though distant a thousand miles, stretched north and
south an almost endless Archipelago, here and there inhabited, but
little known; and mostly unfrequented, even by whalemen, who go almost
every where. Beginning at the southerly termination of this great
chain, it comprises the islands loosely known as Ellice’s group; then,
the Kingsmill isles; then, the Radack and Mulgrave clusters. These
islands had been represented to me as mostly of coral formation, low
and fertile, and abounding in a variety of fruits. The language of the
people was said to be very similar to that or the Navigator’s islands,
from which, their ancestors are supposed to have emigrated.

And thus much being said, all has been related that I then knew of the
islands in question. Enough, however, that they existed at all; and
that our path thereto lay over a pleasant sea, and before a reliable
Trade-wind. The distance, though great, was merely an extension of
water; so much blankness to be sailed over; and in a craft, too, that
properly managed has been known to outlive great ships in a gale. For
this much is true of a whale-boat, the cunningest thing in its way ever
fabricated by man.

Upon one of the Kingsmill islands, then, I determined to plant my foot,
come what come would. And I was equally determined that one of the
ship’s boats should float me thither. But I had no idea of being
without a companion. It would be a weary watch to keep all by myself,
with naught but the horizon in sight.

Now, among the crew was a fine old seaman, one Jarl; how old, no one
could tell, not even himself. Forecastle chronology is ever vague and
defective. “Man and boy,” said honest Jarl, “I have lived ever since I
can remember.” And truly, who may call to mind when he was not? To
ourselves, we all seem coeval with creation. Whence it comes, that it
is so hard to die, ere the world itself is departed.

Jarl hailed from the isle of Skye, one of the constellated Hebrides.
Hence, they often called him the Skyeman. And though he was far from
being piratical of soul, he was yet an old Norseman to behold. His
hands were brawny as the paws of a bear; his voice hoarse as a storm
roaring round the old peak of Mull; and his long yellow hair waved
round his head like a sunset. My life for it, Jarl, thy ancestors were
Vikings, who many a time sailed over the salt German sea and the
Baltic; who wedded their Brynhildas in Jutland; and are now quaffing
mead in the halls of Valhalla, and beating time with their cans to the
hymns of the Scalds. Ah! how the old Sagas run through me!

Yet Jarl, the descendant of heroes and kings, was a lone, friendless
mariner on the main, only true to his origin in the sea-life that he
led. But so it has been, and forever will be. What yeoman shall swear
that he is not descended from Alfred? what dunce, that he is not sprung
of old Homer? King Noah, God bless him! fathered us all. Then hold up
your heads, oh ye Helots, blood potential flows through your veins. All
of us have monarchs and sages for kinsmen; nay, angels and archangels
for cousins; since in antediluvian days, the sons of God did verily wed
with our mothers, the irresistible daughters of Eve. Thus all
generations are blended: and heaven and earth of one kin: the
hierarchies of seraphs in the uttermost skies; the thrones and
principalities in the zodiac; the shades that roam throughout space;
the nations and families, flocks and folds of the earth; one and all,
brothers in essence—oh, be we then brothers indeed! All things form but
one whole; the universe a Judea, and God Jehovah its head. Then no more
let us start with affright. In a theocracy, what is to fear? Let us
compose ourselves to death as fagged horsemen sleep in the saddle. Let
us welcome even ghosts when they rise. Away with our stares and
grimaces. The New Zealander’s tattooing is not a prodigy; nor the
Chinaman’s ways an enigma. No custom is strange; no creed is absurd; no
foe, but who will in the end prove a friend. In heaven, at last, our
good, old, white-haired father Adam will greet all alike, and sociality
forever prevail. Christian shall join hands between Gentile and Jew;
grim Dante forget his Infernos, and shake sides with fat Rabelais; and
monk Luther, over a flagon of old nectar, talk over old times with Pope
Leo. Then, shall we sit by the sages, who of yore gave laws to the
Medes and Persians in the sun; by the cavalry captains in Perseus, who
cried, “To horse!” when waked by their Last Trump sounding to the
charge; by the old hunters, who eternities ago, hunted the moose in
Orion; by the minstrels, who sang in the Milky Way when Jesus our
Saviour was born. Then shall we list to no shallow gossip of Magellans
and Drakes; but give ear to the voyagers who have circumnavigated the
Ecliptic; who rounded the Polar Star as Cape Horn. Then shall the
Stagirite and Kant be forgotten, and another folio than theirs be
turned over for wisdom; even the folio now spread with horoscopes as
yet undeciphered, the heaven of heavens on high.

Now, in old Jarl’s lingo there was never an idiom. Your aboriginal tar
is too much of a cosmopolitan for that. Long companionship with seamen
of all tribes: Manilla-men, Anglo-Saxons, Cholos, Lascars, and Danes,
wear away in good time all mother-tongue stammerings. You sink your
clan; down goes your nation; you speak a world’s language, jovially
jabbering in the Lingua-Franca of the forecastle.

True to his calling, the Skyeman was very illiterate; witless of
Salamanca, Heidelberg, or Brazen-Nose; in Delhi, had never turned over
the books of the Brahmins. For geography, in which sailors should be
adepts, since they are forever turning over and over the great globe of
globes, poor Jarl was deplorably lacking. According to his view of the
matter, this terraqueous world had been formed in the manner of a tart;
the land being a mere marginal crust, within which rolled the watery
world proper. Such seemed my good Viking’s theory of cosmography. As
for other worlds, he weened not of them; yet full as much as
Chrysostom.

Ah, Jarl! an honest, earnest Wight; so true and simple, that the secret
operations of thy soul were more inscrutable than the subtle workings
of Spinoza’s.

Thus much be said of the Skyeman; for he was exceedingly taciturn, and
but seldom will speak for himself.

Now, higher sympathies apart, for Jarl I had a wonderful liking; for he
loved me; from the first had cleaved to me.

It is sometimes the case, that an old mariner like him will conceive a
very strong attachment for some young sailor, his shipmate; an
attachment so devoted, as to be wholly inexplicable, unless originating
in that heart-loneliness which overtakes most seamen as they grow aged;
impelling them to fasten upon some chance object of regard. But however
it was, my Viking, thy unbidden affection was the noblest homage ever
paid me. And frankly, I am more inclined to think well of myself, as in
some way deserving thy devotion, than from the rounded compliments of
more cultivated minds.

Now, at sea, and in the fellowship of sailors, all men appear as they
are. No school like a ship for studying human nature. The contact of
one man with another is too near and constant to favor deceit. You wear
your character as loosely as your flowing trowsers. Vain all endeavors
to assume qualities not yours; or to conceal those you possess.
Incognitos, however desirable, are out of the question. And thus aboard
of all ships in which I have sailed, I have invariably been known by a
sort of thawing-room title. Not,—let me hurry to say,—that I put hand
in tar bucket with a squeamish air, or ascended the rigging with a
Chesterfieldian mince. No, no, I was never better than my vocation; and
mine have been many. I showed as brown a chest, and as hard a hand, as
the tarriest tar of them all. And never did shipmate of mine upbraid me
with a genteel disinclination to duty, though it carried me to truck of
main-mast, or jib-boom-end, in the most wolfish blast that ever howled.

Whence then, this annoying appellation? for annoying it most assuredly
was. It was because of something in me that could not be hidden;
stealing out in an occasional polysyllable; an otherwise
incomprehensible deliberation in dining; remote, unguarded allusions to
Belles-Lettres affairs; and other trifles superfluous to mention.

But suffice it to say, that it had gone abroad among the Arcturion’s
crew, that at some indefinite period of my career, I had been a “nob.”
But Jarl seemed to go further. He must have taken me for one of the
House of Hanover in disguise; or, haply, for bonneted Charles Edward
the Pretender, who, like the Wandering Jew, may yet be a vagrant. At
any rate, his loyalty was extreme. Unsolicited, he was my laundress and
tailor; a most expert one, too; and when at meal-times my turn came
round to look out at the mast-head, or stand at the wheel, he catered
for me among the “kids” in the forecastle with unwearied assiduity.
Many’s the good lump of “duff” for which I was indebted to my good
Viking’s good care of me. And like Sesostris I was served by a monarch.
Yet in some degree the obligation was mutual. For be it known that, in
sea-parlance, we were _chummies._

Now this _chummying_ among sailors is like the brotherhood subsisting
between a brace of collegians (chums) rooming together. It is a
Fidus-Achates-ship, a league of offense and defense, a copartnership of
chests and toilets, a bond of love and good feeling, and a mutual
championship of the absent one. True, my nautical reminiscenses remind
me of sundry lazy, ne’er-do-well, unprofitable, and abominable
chummies; chummies, who at meal times were last at the “kids,” when
their unfortunate partners were high upon the spars; chummies, who
affected awkwardness at the needle, and conscientious scruples about
dabbling in the suds; so that chummy the simple was made to do all the
work of the firm, while chummy the cunning played the sleeping partner
in his hammock. Out upon such chummies!

But I appeal to thee, honest Jarl, if I was ever chummy the cunning.
Never mind if thou didst fabricate my tarpaulins; and with Samaritan
charity bind up the rents, and pour needle and thread into the
frightful gashes that agonized my hapless nether integuments, which
thou calledst “ducks;”—Didst thou not expressly declare, that all these
things, and more, thou wouldst do for me, despite my own quaint
thimble, fashioned from the ivory tusk of a whale? Nay; could I even
wrest from thy willful hands my very shirt, when once thou hadst it
steaming in an unsavory pickle in thy capacious vat, a decapitated
cask? Full well thou knowest, Jarl, that these things are true; and I
am bound to say it, to disclaim any lurking desire to reap advantage
from thy great good nature.

Now my Viking for me, thought I, when I cast about for a comrade; and
my Viking alone.




CHAPTER IV.
A Chat In The Clouds


The Skyeman seemed so earnest and upright a seaman, that to tell the
plain truth, in spite of his love for me, I had many misgivings as to
his readiness to unite in an undertaking which apparently savored of a
moral dereliction. But all things considered, I deemed my own
resolution quite venial; and as for inducing another to join me, it
seemed a precaution so indispensable, as to outweigh all other
considerations.

Therefore I resolved freely to open my heart to him; for that special
purpose paying him a visit, when, like some old albatross in the air,
he happened to be perched at the foremast-head, all by himself, on the
lookout for whales never seen.

Now this standing upon a bit of stick 100 feet aloft for hours at a
time, swiftly sailing over the sea, is very much like crossing the
Channel in a balloon. Manfred-like, you talk to the clouds: you have a
fellow feeling for the sun. And when Jarl and I got conversing up
there, smoking our dwarfish “dudeens,” any sea-gull passing by might
have taken us for Messrs. Blanchard and Jeffries, socially puffing
their after-dinner Bagdads, bound to Calais, via Heaven, from Dover.
Honest Jarl, I acquainted with all: my conversation with the captain,
the hint implied in his last words, my firm resolve to quit the ship in
one of her boats, and the facility with which I thought the thing could
be done. Then I threw out many inducements, in the shape of pleasant
anticipations of bearing right down before the wind upon the sunny
isles under our lee.

He listened attentively; but so long remained silent that I almost
fancied there was something in Jarl which would prove too much for me
and my eloquence.

At last he very bluntly declared that the scheme was a crazy one; he
had never known of such a thing but thrice before; and in every case
the runaways had never afterwards been heard of. He entreated me to
renounce my determination, not be a boy, pause and reflect, stick to
the ship, and go home in her like a man. Verily, my Viking talked to me
like my uncle.

But to all this I turned a deaf ear; affirming that my mind was made
up; and that as he refused to accompany me, and I fancied no one else
for a comrade, I would go stark alone rather than not at all. Upon
this, seeing my resolution immovable, he bluntly swore that he would
follow me through thick and thin.

Thanks, Jarl! thou wert one of those devoted fellows who will wrestle
hard to convince one loved of error; but failing, forthwith change
their wrestling to a sympathetic hug.

But now his elderly prudence came into play. Casting his eye over the
boundless expanse below, he inquired how far off were the islands in
question.

“A thousand miles and no less.”

“With a fair trade breeze, then, and a boat sail, that is a good twelve
days’ passage, but calms and currents may make it a month, perhaps
more.” So saying, he shook his old head, and his yellow hair streamed.

But trying my best to chase away these misgivings, he at last gave them
over. He assured me I might count upon him to his uttermost keel.

My Viking secured, I felt more at ease; and thoughtfully considered how
the enterprise might best be accomplished.

There was no time to be lost. Every hour was carrying us farther and
farther from the parallel most desirable for us to follow in our route
to the westward. So, with all possible dispatch, I matured my plans,
and communicated them to Jarl, who gave several old hints—having
ulterior probabilities in view—which were not neglected.

Strange to relate, it was not till my Viking, with a rueful face,
reminded me of the fact, that I bethought me of a circumstance somewhat
alarming at the first blush. We must push off without chart or
quadrant; though, as will shortly be seen, a compass was by no means
out of the question. The chart, to be sure, I did not so much lay to
heart; but a quadrant was more than desirable. Still, it was by no
means indispensable. For this reason. When we started, our latitude
would be exactly known; and whether, on our voyage westward, we drifted
north or south therefrom, we could not, by any possibility, get so far
out of our reckoning, as to fail in striking some one of a long chain
of islands, which, for many degrees, on both sides of the equator,
stretched right across our track.

For much the same reason, it mattered little, whether on our passage we
daily knew our longitude; for no known land lay between us and the
place we desired to reach. So what could be plainer than this: that if
westward we patiently held on our way, we must eventually achieve our
destination?

As for intervening shoals or reefs, if any there were, they intimidated
us not. In a boat that drew but a few inches of water, but an
indifferent look-out would preclude all danger on that score. At all
events, the thing seemed feasible enough, notwithstanding old Jarl’s
superstitious reverence for nautical instruments, and the philosophical
objections which might have been urged by a pedantic disciple of
Mercator.

Very often, as the old maxim goes, the simplest things are the most
startling, and that, too, from their very simplicity. So cherish no
alarms, if thus we addressed the setting sun—“Be thou, old pilot, our
guide!”




CHAPTER V.
Seats Secured And Portmanteaus Packed


But thoughts of sextants and quadrants were the least of our cares.

Right from under the very arches of the eyebrows of thirty men—captain,
mates, and crew—a boat was to be abstracted; they knowing nothing of
the event, until all knowledge would prove unavailing.

Hark ye:

At sea, the boats of a South Sea-man (generally four in number, spare
ones omitted,) are suspended by tackles, hooked above, to curved
timbers called “davits,” vertically fixed to the ship’s sides.

Now, no fair one with golden locks is more assiduously waited upon, or
more delicately handled by her tire-women, than the slender whale- boat
by her crew. And out of its element, it seems fragile enough to justify
the utmost solicitude. For truly, like a fine lady, the fine whale-boat
is most delicate when idle, though little coy at a pinch.

Besides the “davits,” the following supports are provided Two small
cranes are swung under the keel, on which the latter rests, preventing
the settling of the boat’s middle, while hanging suspended by the bow
and stern. A broad, braided, hempen band, usually worked in a tasteful
pattern, is also passed round both gunwales; and secured to the ship’s
bulwarks, firmly lashes the craft to its place. Being elevated above
the ship’s rail, the boats are in plain sight from all parts of the
deck.

Now, one of these boats was to be made way with. No facile matter,
truly. Harder than for any dashing young Janizary to run off with a
sultana from the Grand Turk’s seraglio. Still, the thing could be done,
for, by Jove, it had been.

What say you to slyly loosing every thing by day; and when night comes,
cast off the band and swing in the cranes? But how lower the tackles,
even in the darkest night, without a creaking more fearful than the
death rattle? Easily avoided. Anoint the ropes, and they will travel
deftly through the subtle windings of the blocks.

But though I had heard of this plan being pursued, there was a degree
of risk in it, after all, which I was far from fancying. Another plan
was hit upon; still bolder; and hence more safe. What it was, in the
right place will be seen.

In selecting my craft for this good voyage, I would fain have traversed
the deck, and eyed the boats like a cornet choosing his steed from out
a goodly stud. But this was denied me. And the “bow boat” was,
perforce, singled out, as the most remote from the quarter-deck, that
region of sharp eyes and relentless purposes.

Then, our larder was to be thought of; also, an abundant supply of
water; concerning which last I determined to take good heed. There were
but two to be taken care of; but I resolved to lay in sufficient store
of both meat and drink for four; at the same time that the supplemental
twain thus provided for were but imaginary. And if it came to the last
dead pinch, of which we had no fear, however, I was food for no man but
Jarl.

Little time was lost in catering for our mess. Biscuit and salt beef
were our sole resource; and, thanks to the generosity of the
Arcturion’s owners, our ship’s company had a plentiful supply. Casks of
both, with heads knocked out, were at the service of all. In bags which
we made for the purpose, a sufficiency of the biscuit was readily
stored away, and secreted in a corner of easy access. The salt beef was
more difficult to obtain; but, little by little, we managed to smuggle
out of the cask enough to answer our purpose.

As for water, most luckily a day or two previous several “breakers” of
it had been hoisted from below for the present use of the ship’s
company.

These “breakers” are casks, long and slender, but very strong. Of
various diameters, they are made on purpose to stow into spaces
intervening between the immense butts in a ship’s hold.

The largest we could find was selected, first carefully examining it to
detect any leak. On some pretense or other, we then rolled them all
over to that side of the vessel where our boat was suspended, the
selected breaker being placed in their middle.

Our compendious wardrobes were snugly packed into bundles and laid
aside for the present. And at last, by due caution, we had every thing
arranged preliminary to the final start. Let me say, though, perhaps to
the credit of Jarl, that whenever the most strategy was necessary, he
seemed ill at ease, and for the most part left the matter to me. It was
well that he did; for as it was, by his untimely straight-forwardness,
he once or twice came near spoiling every thing. Indeed, on one
occasion he was so unseasonably blunt, that curiously enough, I had
almost suspected him of taking that odd sort of interest in one’s
welfare, which leads a philanthropist, all other methods failing, to
frustrate a project deemed bad; by pretending clumsily to favor it. But
no inuendoes; Jarl was a Viking, frank as his fathers; though not so
much of a bucanier.




CHAPTER VI.
Eight Bells


The moon must be monstrous coy, or some things fall out opportunely, or
else almanacs are consulted by nocturnal adventurers; but so it is,
that when Cynthia shows a round and chubby disk, few daring deeds are
done. Though true it may be, that of moonlight nights, jewelers’
caskets and maidens’ hearts have been burglariously broken into—and
rifled, for aught Copernicus can tell.

The gentle planet was in her final quarter, and upon her slender horn I
hung my hopes of withdrawing from the ship undetected.

Now, making a tranquil passage across the ocean, we kept at this time
what are called among whalemen “boatscrew-watches.” That is, instead of
the sailors being divided at night into two bands, alternately on deck
every four hours, there were four watches, each composed of a boat’s
crew, the “headsman” (always one of the mates) excepted. To the
officers, this plan gives uninterrupted repose—“all-night-in,” as they
call it, and of course greatly lightens the duties of the crew.

The harpooneers head the boats’ crews, and are responsible for the ship
during the continuance of their watches.

Now, my Viking being a stalwart seaman, pulled the midship oar of the
boat of which I was bowsman. Hence, we were in the same watch; to
which, also, three others belonged, including Mark, the harpooner. One
of these seamen, however, being an invalid, there were only two left
for us to manage.

Voyaging in these seas, you may glide along for weeks without starting
tack or sheet, hardly moving the helm a spoke, so mild and constant are
the Trades. At night, the watch seldom trouble themselves with keeping
much of a look-out; especially, as a strange sail is almost a prodigy
in these lonely waters. In some ships, for weeks in and weeks out, you
are puzzled to tell when your nightly turn on deck really comes round;
so little heed is given to the standing of watches, where in the
license of presumed safety, nearly every one nods without fear.

But remiss as you may be in the boats-crew-watch of a heedless
whaleman, the man who heads it is bound to maintain his post on the
quarter-deck until regularly relieved. Yet drowsiness being incidental
to all natures, even to Napoleon, beside his own sentry napping in the
snowy bivouac; so, often, in snowy moonlight, or ebon eclipse, dozed
Mark, our harpooneer. Lethe be his portion this blessed night, thought
I, as during the morning which preceded our enterprise, I eyed the man
who might possibly cross my plans.

But let me come closer to this part of my story. During what are called
at sea the “dog-watches” (between four o’clock and eight in the
evening), sailors are quite lively and frolicsome; their spirits even
flow far into the first of the long “night-watches;” but upon its
expiration at “eight bells” (midnight), silence begins to reign; if you
hear a voice it is no cherub’s: all exclamations are oaths.

At eight bells, the mariners on deck, now relieved from their cares,
crawl out from their sleepy retreats in old monkey jackets, or coils of
rigging, and hie to their hammocks, almost without interrupting their
dreams: while the sluggards below lazily drag themselves up the ladder
to resume their slumbers in the open air.

For these reasons then, the moonless sea midnight was just the time to
escape. Hence, we suffered a whole day to pass unemployed; waiting for
the night, when the star board-quarter-boats’-watch, to which we
belonged, would be summoned on deck at the eventful eight of the bell.

But twenty-four hours soon glide away; and “Starboleens ahoy; eight
bells there below;” at last started me from a troubled doze.

I sprang from my hammock, and would have lighted my pipe. But the
forecastle lamp had gone out. An old sea-dog was talking about sharks
in his sleep. Jarl and our solitary watch-mate were groping their way
into their trowsers. And little was heard but the humming of the still
sails aloft; the dash of the waves against the bow; and the deep
breathing of the dreaming sailors around.




CHAPTER VII.
A Pause


Good old Arcturion! Maternal craft; that rocked me so often in thy
heart of oak, I grieve to tell how I deserted thee on the broad deep.
So far from home, with such a motley crew, so many islanders, whose
heathen babble echoing through thy Christian hull, must have grated
harshly on every carline.

Old ship! where sails thy lone ghost now? For of the stout Arcturion no
word was ever heard, from the dark hour we pushed from her fated
planks. In what time of tempest, to what seagull’s scream, the drowning
eddies did their work, knows no mortal man. Sunk she silently,
helplessly, into the calm depths of that summer sea, assassinated by
the ruthless blade of the swordfish? Such things have been. Or was hers
a better fate? Stricken down while gallantly battling with the blast;
her storm-sails set; helm manned; and every sailor at his post; as sunk
the Hornet, her men at quarters, in some distant gale.

But surmises are idle. A very old craft, she may have foundered; or
laid her bones upon some treacherous reef; but as with many a far
rover, her fate is a mystery.

Pray Heaven, the spirit of that lost vessel roaming abroad through the
troubled mists of midnight gales—as old mariners believe of missing
ships—may never haunt my future path upon the waves. Peacefully may she
rest at the bottom of the sea; and sweetly sleep my shipmates in the
lowest watery zone, where prowling sharks come not, nor billows roll.

By quitting the Arcturion when we did, Jarl and I unconsciously eluded
a sailor’s grave. We hear of providential deliverances. Was this one?
But life is sweet to all, death comes as hard. And for myself I am
almost tempted to hang my head, that I escaped the fate of my
shipmates; something like him who blushed to have escaped the fell
carnage at Thermopylae.

Though I can not repress a shudder when I think of that old ship’s end,
it is impossible for me so much as to imagine, that our deserting her
could have been in any way instrumental in her loss. Nevertheless, I
would to heaven the Arcturion still floated; that it was given me once
more to tread her familiar decks.




CHAPTER VIII.
They Push Off, Velis Et Remis


And now to tell how, tempted by devil or good angel, and a thousand
miles from land, we embarked upon this western voyage.

It was midnight, mark you, when our watch began; and my turn at the
helm now coming on was of course to be avoided. On some plausible
pretense, I induced our solitary watchmate to assume it; thus leaving
myself untrammeled, and at the same time satisfactorily disposing of
him. For being a rather fat fellow, an enormous consumer of “duff,” and
with good reason supposed to be the son of a farmer, I made no doubt,
he would pursue his old course and fall to nodding over the wheel. As
for the leader of the watch—our harpooner—he fell heir to the nest of
old jackets, under the lee of the mizzen-mast, left nice and warm by
his predecessor.

The night was even blacker than we had anticipated; there was no trace
of a moon; and the dark purple haze, sometimes encountered at night
near the Line, half shrouded the stars from view.

Waiting about twenty minutes after the last man of the previous watch
had gone below, I motioned to Jarl, and we slipped our shoes from our
feet. He then descended into the forecastle, and I sauntered aft toward
the quarter-deck. All was still. Thrice did I pass my hand full before
the face of the slumbering lubber at the helm, and right between him
and the light of the binnacle.

Mark, the harpooneer, was not so easily sounded. I feared to approach
him. He lay quietly, though; but asleep or awake, no more delay. Risks
must be run, when time presses. And our ears were a pointer’s to catch
a sound.

To work we went, without hurry, but swiftly and silently. Our various
stores were dragged from their lurking-places, and placed in the boat,
which hung from the ship’s lee side, the side depressed in the water,
an indispensable requisite to an attempt at escape. And though at
sundown the boat was to windward, yet, as we had foreseen, the vessel
having been tacked during the first watch, brought it to leeward.

Endeavoring to manhandle our clumsy breaker, and lift it into the boat,
we found, that by reason of the intervention of the shrouds, it could
not be done without, risking a jar; besides straining the craft in
lowering. An expedient, however, though at the eleventh hour, was hit
upon. Fastening a long rope to the breaker, which was perfectly tight,
we cautiously dropped it overboard; paying out enough line, to insure
its towing astern of the ship, so as not to strike against the copper.
The other end of the line we then secured to the boat’s stern.

Fortunately, this was the last thing to be done; for the breaker,
acting as a clog to the vessel’s way in the water, so affected her
steering as to fling her perceptibly into the wind. And by causing the
helm to work, this must soon rouse the lubber there stationed, if not
already awake. But our dropping overboard the breaker greatly aided us
in this respect: it diminished the ship’s headway; which owing to the
light breeze had not been very great at any time during the night. Had
it been so, all hope of escaping without first arresting the vessel’s
progress, would have been little short of madness. As it was, the sole
daring of the deed that night achieved, consisted in our lowering away
while the ship yet clove the brine, though but moderately.

All was now ready: the cranes swung in, the lashings adrift, and the
boat fairly suspended; when, seizing the ends of the tackle ropes, we
silently stepped into it, one at each end. The dead weight of the
breaker astern now dragged the craft horizontally through the air, so
that her tackle ropes strained hard. She quivered like a dolphin.
Nevertheless, had we not feared her loud splash upon striking the wave,
we might have quitted the ship almost as silently as the breath the
body. But this was out of the question, and our plans were laid
accordingly.

“All ready, Jarl?”

“Ready.”

“A man overboard!” I shouted at the top of my compass; and like
lightning the cords slid through our blistering hands, and with a
tremendous shock the boat bounded on the sea’s back. One mad sheer and
plunge, one terrible strain on the tackles as we sunk in the trough of
the waves, tugged upon by the towing breaker, and our knives severed
the tackle ropes—we hazarded not unhooking the blocks—our oars were
out, and the good boat headed round, with prow to leeward.

“Man overboard!” was now shouted from stem to stern. And directly we
heard the confused tramping and shouting of the sailors, as they rushed
from their dreams into the almost inscrutable darkness.

“Man overboard! Man overboard!” My heart smote me as the human cry of
horror came out of the black vaulted night.

“Down helm!” was soon heard from the chief mate. “Back the main-yard!
Quick to the boats! How’s this? One down already? Well done! Hold on,
then, those other boats!”

Meanwhile several seamen were shouting as they strained at the braces.

“Cut! cut all! Lower away! lower away!” impatiently cried the sailors,
who already had leaped into the boats.

“Heave the ship to, and hold fast every thing,” cried the captain,
apparently just springing to the deck. “One boat’s enough. Steward;
show a light there from the mizzen-top. Boat ahoy!—Have you got that
man?”

No reply. The voice came out of a cloud; the ship dimly showing like a
ghost. We had desisted from rowing, and hand over hand were now hauling
in upon the rope attached to the breaker, which we soon lifted into the
boat, instantly resuming our oars.

“Pull! pull, men! and save him!” again shouted the captain.

“Ay, ay, sir,” answered Jarl instinctively, “pulling as hard as ever we
can, sir.”

And pull we did, till nothing could be heard from the ship but a
confused tumult; and, ever and anon, the hoarse shout of the captain,
too distant to be understood.

We now set our sail to a light air; and right into the darkness, and
dead to leeward, we rowed and sailed till morning dawned.




CHAPTER IX.
The Watery World Is All Before Them


At sea in an open boat, and a thousand miles from land!

Shortly after the break of day, in the gray transparent light, a speck
to windward broke the even line of the horizon. It was the ship wending
her way north-eastward.

Had I not known the final indifference of sailors to such disasters as
that which the Arcturion’s crew must have imputed to the night past
(did not the skipper suspect the truth) I would have regarded that
little speck with many compunctions of conscience. Nor, as it was, did
I feel in any very serene humor. For the consciousness of being deemed
dead, is next to the presumable unpleasantness of being so in reality.
One feels like his own ghost unlawfully tenanting a defunct carcass.
Even Jarl’s glance seemed so queer, that I begged him to look another
way.

Secure now from all efforts of the captain to recover those whom he
most probably supposed lost; and equally cut off from all hope of
returning to the ship even had we felt so inclined; the resolution that
had thus far nerved me, began to succumb in a measure to the awful
loneliness of the scene. Ere this, I had regarded the ocean as a slave,
the steed that bore me whither I listed, and whose vicious
propensities, mighty though they were, often proved harmless, when
opposed to the genius of man. But now, how changed! In our frail boat,
I would fain have built an altar to Neptune.

What a mere toy we were to the billows, that jeeringly shouldered us
from crest to crest, as from hand to hand lost souls may be tossed
along by the chain of shades which enfilade the route to Tartarus.

But drown or swim, here’s overboard with care! Cheer up, Jarl! Ha! Ha!
how merrily, yet terribly, we sail! Up, up—slowly up—toiling up the
long, calm wave; then balanced on its summit a while, like a plank on a
rail; and down, we plunge headlong into the seething abyss, till
arrested, we glide upward again. And thus did we go. Now buried in
watery hollows—our sail idly flapping; then lifted aloft—canvas
bellying; and beholding the furthest horizon.

Had not our familiarity with the business of whaling divested our
craft’s wild motions of its first novel horrors, we had been but a
rueful pair. But day-long pulls after whales, the ship left miles
astern; and entire dark nights passed moored to the monsters, killed
too late to be towed to the ship far to leeward:—all this, and much
more, accustoms one to strange things. Death, to be sure, has a mouth
as black as a wolf’s, and to be thrust into his jaws is a serious
thing. But true it most certainly is—and I speak from no hearsay—that
to sailors, as a class, the grisly king seems not half so hideous as he
appears to those who have only regarded him on shore, and at a
deferential distance. Like many ugly mortals, his features grow less
frightful upon acquaintance; and met over often and sociably, the old
adage holds true, about familiarity breeding contempt. Thus too with
soldiers. Of the quaking recruit, three pitched battles make a grim
grenadier; and he who shrank from the muzzle of a cannon, is now ready
to yield his mustache for a sponge.

And truly, since death is the last enemy of all, valiant souls will
taunt him while they may. Yet rather, should the wise regard him as the
inflexible friend, who, even against our own wills, from life’s evils
triumphantly relieves us.

And there is but little difference in the manner of dying. To die, is
all. And death has been gallantly encountered by those who never beheld
blood that was red, only its light azure seen through the veins. And to
yield the ghost proudly, and march out of your fortress with all the
honors of war, is not a thing of sinew and bone. Though in prison,
Geoffry Hudson, the dwarf, died more bravely than Goliah, the giant;
and the last end of a butterfly shames us all. Some women have lived
nobler lives, and died nobler deaths, than men. Threatened with the
stake, mitred Cranmer recanted; but through her fortitude, the lorn
widow of Edessa stayed the tide of Valens’ persecutions. ’Tis no great
valor to perish sword in hand, and bravado on lip; cased all in panoply
complete. For even the alligator dies in his mail, and the swordfish
never surrenders. To expire, mild-eyed, in one’s bed, transcends the
death of Epaminondas.




CHAPTER X.
They Arrange Their Canopies And Lounges, And Try To Make Things
Comfortable


Our little craft was soon in good order. From the spare rigging brought
along, we made shrouds to the mast, and converted the boat- hook into a
handy boom for the jib. Going large before the wind, we set this sail
wing-and-wing with the main-sail. The latter, in accordance with the
customary rig of whale-boats, was worked with a sprit and sheet. It
could be furled or set in an instant. The bags of bread we stowed away
in the covered space about the loggerhead, a useless appurtenance now,
and therefore removed. At night, Jarl used it for a pillow; saying,
that when the boat rolled it gave easy play to his head. The precious
breaker we lashed firmly amidships; thereby much improving our sailing.

Now, previous to leaving the ship, we had seen to it well, that our
craft was supplied with all those equipments, with which, by the
regulations of the fishery, a whale-boat is constantly provided: night
and day, afloat or suspended. Hanging along our gunwales inside, were
six harpoons, three lances, and a blubber-spade; all keen as razors,
and sheathed with leather. Besides these, we had three waifs, a couple
of two-gallon water-kegs, several bailers, the boat-hatchet for cutting
the whale-line, two auxiliary knives for the like purpose, and several
minor articles, also employed in hunting the leviathan. The line and
line-tub, however, were on ship-board.

And here it may be mentioned, that to prevent the strain upon the boat
when suspended to the ship’s side, the heavy whale-line, over two
hundred fathoms in length, and something more than an inch in diameter,
when not in use is kept on ship-board, coiled away like an endless
snake in its tub. But this tub is always in readiness to be launched
into the boat. Now, having no use for the line belonging to our craft,
we had purposely left it behind.

But well had we marked that by far the most important item of a
whale-boat’s furniture was snugly secured in its place. This was the
water-tight keg, at both ends firmly headed, containing a small
compass, tinder-box and flint, candles, and a score or two of biscuit.
This keg is an invariable precaution against what so frequently occurs
in pursuing the sperm whale—prolonged absence from the ship, losing
sight of her, or never seeing her more, till years after you reach home
again. In this same keg of ours seemed coopered up life and death, at
least so seemed it to honest Jarl. No sooner had we got clear from the
Arcturion, than dropping his oar for an instant, he clutched at it in
the dark.

And when day at last came, we knocked out the head of the keg with the
little hammer and chisel, always attached to it for that purpose, and
removed the compass, that glistened to us like a human eye. Then
filling up the vacancy with biscuit, we again made all tight, driving
down the hoops till they would budge no more.

At first we were puzzled to fix our compass. But at last the Skyeman
out knife, and cutting a round hole in the after-most thwart, or seat
of the boat, there inserted the little brass case containing the
needle.

Over the stern of the boat, with some old canvas which my Viking’s
forethought had provided, we spread a rude sort of awning, or rather
counterpane. This, however, proved but little or no protection from the
glare of the sun; for the management of the main-sail forbade any
considerable elevation of the shelter. And when the breeze was fresh,
we were fain to strike it altogether; for the wind being from aft, and
getting underneath the canvas, almost lifted the light boat’s stem into
the air, vexing the counterpane as if it were a petticoat turning a
gusty corner. But when a mere breath rippled the sea, and the sun was
fiery hot, it was most pleasant to lounge in this shady asylum. It was
like being transferred from the roast to cool in the cupboard. And
Jarl, much the toughest fowl of the two, out of an abundant kindness
for his comrade, during the day voluntarily remained exposed at the
helm, almost two hours to my one. No lady-like scruples had he, the old
Viking, about marring his complexion, which already was more than
bronzed. Over the ordinary tanning of the sailor, he seemed masked by a
visor of japanning, dotted all over with freckles, so intensely yellow,
and symmetrically circular, that they seemed scorched there by a
burning glass.

In the tragico-comico moods which at times overtook me, I used to look
upon the brown Skyeman with humorous complacency. If we fall in with
cannibals, thought I, then, ready-roasted Norseman that thou art, shall
I survive to mourn thee; at least, during the period I revolve upon the
spit.

But of such a fate, it needs hardly be said, we had no apprehension.




CHAPTER XI.
Jarl Afflicted With The Lockjaw


If ever again I launch whale-boat from sheer-plank of ship at sea, I
shall take good heed, that my comrade be a sprightly fellow, with a
rattle-box head. Be he never so silly, his very silliness, so long as
he be lively at it, shall be its own excuse.

Upon occasion, who likes not a lively loon, one of your giggling,
gamesome oafs, whose mouth is a grin? Are not such, well-ordered
dispensations of Providence? filling up vacuums, in intervals of social
stagnation relieving the tedium of existing? besides keeping up, here
and there, in very many quarters indeed, sundry people’s good opinion
of themselves? What, if at times their speech is insipid as water after
wine? What, if to ungenial and irascible souls, their very “mug” is an
exasperation to behold, their clack an inducement to suicide? Let us
not be hard upon them for this; but let them live on for the good they
may do.

But Jarl, dear, dumb Jarl, thou wert none of these. Thou didst carry a
phiz like an excommunicated deacon’s. And no matter what happened, it
was ever the same. Quietly, in thyself, thou didst revolve upon thine
own sober axis, like a wheel in a machine which forever goes round,
whether you look at it or no. Ay, Jarl! wast thou not forever intent
upon minding that which so many neglect—thine own especial business?
Wast thou not forever at it, too, with no likelihood of ever winding up
thy moody affairs, and striking a balance sheet?

But at times how wearisome to me these everlasting reveries in my one
solitary companion. I longed for something enlivening; a burst of
words; human vivacity of one kind or other. After in vain essaying to
get something of this sort out of Jarl, I tried it all by myself;
playing upon my body as upon an instrument; singing, halloing, and
making empty gestures, till my Viking stared hard; and I myself paused
to consider whether I had run crazy or no.

But how account for the Skyeman’s gravity? Surely, it was based upon no
philosophic taciturnity; he was nothing of an idealist; an aerial
architect; a constructor of flying buttresses. It was inconceivable,
that his reveries were Manfred-like and exalted, reminiscent of
unutterable deeds, too mysterious even to be indicated by the remotest
of hints. Suppositions all out of the question.

His ruminations were a riddle. I asked him anxiously, whether, in any
part of the world, Savannah, Surat, or Archangel, he had ever a wife to
think of; or children, that he carried so lengthy a phiz. Nowhere
neither. Therefore, as by his own confession he had nothing to think of
but himself, and there was little but honesty in him (having which, by
the way, he may be thought full to the brim), what could I fall back
upon but my original theory: namely, that in repose, his intellects
stepped out, and left his body to itself.




CHAPTER XII.
More About Being In An Open Boat


On the third morning, at break of day, I sat at the steering oar, an
hour or two previous having relieved Jarl, now fast asleep. Somehow,
and suddenly, a sense of peril so intense, came over me, that it could
hardly have been aggravated by the completest solitude.

On a ship’s deck, the mere feeling of elevation above the water, and
the reach of prospect you command, impart a degree of confidence which
disposes you to exult in your fancied security. But in an open boat,
brought down to the very plane of the sea, this feeling almost wholly
deserts you. Unless the waves, in their gambols, toss you and your chip
upon one of their lordly crests, your sphere of vision is little larger
than it would be at the bottom of a well. At best, your most extended
view in any one direction, at least, is in a high, slow-rolling sea;
when you descend into the dark, misty spaces, between long and uniform
swells. Then, for the moment, it is like looking up and down in a
twilight glade, interminable; where two dawns, one on each hand, seem
struggling through the semi-transparent tops of the fluid mountains.

But, lingering not long in those silent vales, from watery cliff to
cliff, a sea-chamois, sprang our solitary craft,—a goat among the Alps!

How undulated the horizon; like a vast serpent with ten thousand folds
coiled all round the globe; yet so nigh, apparently, that it seemed as
if one’s hand might touch it.

What loneliness; when the sun rose, and spurred up the heavens, we
hailed him as a wayfarer in Sahara the sight of a distant horseman.
Save ourselves, the sun and the Chamois seemed all that was left of
life in the universe. We yearned toward its jocund disk, as in strange
lands the traveler joyfully greets a face from home, which there had
passed unheeded. And was not the sun a fellow-voyager? were we not both
wending westward? But how soon he daily overtook and passed us;
hurrying to his journey’s end.

When a week had gone by, sailing steadily on, by day and by night, and
nothing in sight but this self-same sea, what wonder if disquieting
thoughts at last entered our hearts? If unknowingly we should pass the
spot where, according to our reckoning, our islands lay, upon what
shoreless sea would we launch? At times, these forebodings bewildered
my idea of the positions of the groups beyond. All became vague and
confused; so that westward of the Kingsmil isles and the Radack chain,
I fancied there could be naught but an endless sea.




CHAPTER XIII.
Of The Chondropterygii, And Other Uncouth Hordes Infesting The South
Seas


At intervals in our lonely voyage, there were sights which diversified
the scene; especially when the constellation Pisces was in the
ascendant.

It’s famous botanizing, they say, in Arkansas’ boundless prairies; I
commend the student of Ichthyology to an open boat, and the ocean moors
of the Pacific. As your craft glides along, what strange monsters float
by. Elsewhere, was never seen their like. And nowhere are they found in
the books of the naturalists.

Though America be discovered, the Cathays of the deep are unknown. And
whoso crosses the Pacific might have read lessons to Buffon. The
sea-serpent is not a fable; and in the sea, that snake is but a garden
worm. There are more wonders than the wonders rejected, and more sights
unrevealed than you or I ever ever dreamt of. Moles and bats alone
should be skeptics; and the only true infidelity is for a live man to
vote himself dead. Be Sir Thomas Brown our ensample; who, while
exploding “Vulgar Errors,” heartily hugged all the mysteries in the
Pentateuch.

But look! fathoms down in the sea; where ever saw you a phantom like
that? An enormous crescent with antlers like a reindeer, and a Delta of
mouths. Slowly it sinks, and is seen no more.

Doctor Faust saw the devil; but you have seen the “Devil Fish.”

Look again! Here comes another. Jarl calls it a Bone Shark. Full as
large as a whale, it is spotted like a leopard; and tusk-like teeth
overlap its jaws like those of the walrus. To seamen, nothing strikes
more terror than the near vicinity of a creature like this. Great ships
steer out of its path. And well they may; since the good craft Essex,
and others, have been sunk by sea-monsters, as the alligator thrusts
his horny snout through a Carribean canoe.

Ever present to us, was the apprehension of some sudden disaster from
the extraordinary zoological specimens we almost hourly passed.

For the sharks, we saw them, not by units, nor by tens, nor by
hundreds; but by thousands and by myriads. Trust me, there are more
sharks in the sea than mortals on land.

And of these prolific fish there are full as many species as of dogs.
But by the German naturalists Muller and Henle, who, in christening the
sharks, have bestowed upon them the most heathenish names, they are
classed under one family; which family, according to Muller,
king-at-arms, is an undoubted branch of the ancient and famous tribe of
the Chondropterygii.

To begin. There is the ordinary Brown Shark, or sea attorney, so called
by sailors; a grasping, rapacious varlet, that in spite of the hard
knocks received from it, often snapped viciously at our steering oar.
At times, these gentry swim in herds; especially about the remains of a
slaughtered whale. They are the vultures of the deep.

Then we often encountered the dandy Blue Shark, a long, taper and
mighty genteel looking fellow, with a slender waist, like a Bond-
street beau, and the whitest tiers of teeth imaginable. This dainty
spark invariably lounged by with a careless fin and an indolent tail.
But he looked infernally heartless.

How his cold-blooded, gentlemanly air, contrasted with the rude, savage
swagger of the Tiger Shark; a round, portly gourmand; with distended
mouth and collapsed conscience, swimming about seeking whom he might
devour. These gluttons are the scavengers of navies, following ships in
the South Seas, picking up odds and ends of garbage, and sometimes a
tit-bit, a stray sailor. No wonder, then, that sailors denounce them.
In substance, Jarl once assured me, that under any temporary
misfortune, it was one of his sweetest consolations to remember, that
in his day, he had murdered, not killed, shoals of Tiger Sharks.

Yet this is all wrong. As well hate a seraph, as a shark. Both were
made by the same hand. And that sharks are lovable, witness their
domestic endearments. No Fury so ferocious, as not to have some amiable
side. In the wild wilderness, a leopard-mother caresses her cub, as
Hagar did Ishmael; or a queen of France the dauphin. We know not what
we do when we hate. And I have the word of my gentlemanly friend
Stanhope, for it; that he who declared he loved a good hater was but a
respectable sort of Hottentot, at best. No very genteel epithet this,
though coming from the genteelest of men. But when the digger of
dictionaries said that saying of his, he was assuredly not much of a
Christian. However, it is hard for one given up to constitutional hypos
like him; to be filled with the milk and meekness of the gospels. Yet,
with deference, I deny that my old uncle Johnson really believed in the
sentiment ascribed to him. Love a hater, indeed! Who smacks his lips
over gall? Now hate is a thankless thing. So, let us only hate hatred;
and once give love play, we will fall in love with a unicorn. Ah! the
easiest way is the best; and to hate, a man must work hard. Love is a
delight; but hate a torment. And haters are thumbscrews, Scotch boots,
and Spanish inquisitions to themselves. In five words—would they were a
Siamese diphthong—he who hates is a fool.

For several days our Chamois was followed by two of these aforesaid
Tiger Sharks. A brace of confidential inseparables, jogging along in
our wake, side by side, like a couple of highwaymen, biding their time
till you come to the cross-roads. But giving it up at last, for a
bootless errand, they dropped farther and farther astern, until
completely out of sight. Much to the Skyeman’s chagrin; who long stood
in the stern, lance poised for a dart.

But of all sharks, save me from the ghastly White Shark. For though we
should hate naught, yet some dislikes are spontaneous; and disliking is
not hating. And never yet could I bring myself to be loving, or even
sociable, with a White Shark. He is not the sort of creature to enlist
young affections.

This ghost of a fish is not often encountered, and shows plainer by
night than by day. Timon-like, he always swims by himself; gliding
along just under the surface, revealing a long, vague shape, of a milky
hue; with glimpses now and then of his bottomless white pit of teeth.
No need of a dentist hath he. Seen at night, stealing along like a
spirit in the water, with horrific serenity of aspect, the White Shark
sent many a thrill to us twain in the Chamois.

By day, and in the profoundest calms, oft were we startled by the
ponderous sigh of the grampus, as lazily rising to the surface, he
fetched a long breath after napping below.

And time and again we watched the darting albicore, the fish with the
chain-plate armor and golden scales; the Nimrod of the seas, to whom so
many flying fish fall a prey. Flying from their pursuers, many of them
flew into our boat. But invariably they died from the shock. No nursing
could restore them. One of their wings I removed, spreading it out to
dry under a weight. In two days’ time the thin membrane, all over
tracings like those of a leaf, was transparent as isinglass, and tinted
with brilliant hues, like those of a changing silk.

Almost every day, we spied Black Fish; coal-black and glossy. They
seemed to swim by revolving round and round in the water, like a wheel;
their dorsal fins, every now and then shooting into view, like spokes.

Of a somewhat similar species, but smaller, and clipper-built about the
nose, were the Algerines; so called, probably, from their corsair
propensities; waylaying peaceful fish on the high seas, and plundering
them of body and soul at a gulp. Atrocious Turks! a crusade should be
preached against them.

Besides all these, we encountered Killers and Thrashers, by far the
most spirited and “spunky” of the finny tribes. Though little larger
than a porpoise, a band of them think nothing of assailing leviathan
himself. They bait the monster, as dogs a bull. The Killers seizing the
Right whale by his immense, sulky lower lip, and the Thrashers
fastening on to his back, and beating him with their sinewy tails.
Often they come off conquerors, worrying the enemy to death. Though,
sooth to say, if leviathan gets but one sweep al them with his terrible
tail, they go flying into the air, as if tossed from Taurus’ horn.

This sight we beheld. Had old Wouvermans, who once painted a bull bait,
been along with us, a rare chance, that, for his pencil. And Gudin or
Isabey might have thrown the blue rolling sea into the picture. Lastly,
one of Claude’s setting summer suns would have glorified the whole. Oh,
believe me, God’s creatures fighting, fin for fin, a thousand miles
from land, and with the round horizon for an arena; is no ignoble
subject for a masterpiece.

Such are a few of the sights of the great South Sea. But there is no
telling all. The Pacific is populous as China.




CHAPTER XIV.
Jarl’s Misgivings


About this time an event took place. My good Viking opened his mouth,
and spoke. The prodigy occurred, as, jacknife in hand, he was bending
over the midship oar; on the loom, or handle, of which he kept our
almanac; making a notch for every set sun. For some forty-eight hours
past, the wind had been light and variable. It was more than suspected
that a current was sweeping us northward.

Now, marking these things, Jarl threw out the thought, that the more
wind, and the less current, the better; and if a long calm came on, of
which there was some prospect, we had better take to our oars.

Take to our oars! as if we were crossing a ferry, and no ocean leagues
to traverse. The idea indirectly suggested all possible horrors. To be
rid of them forthwith, I proceeded to dole out our morning meal. For to
make away with such things, there is nothing better than bolting
something down on top of them; albeit, oft repeated, the plan is very
apt to beget dyspepsia; and the dyspepsia the blues.

But what of our store of provisions? So far as enough to eat was
concerned, we felt not the slightest apprehension; our supplies proving
more abundant than we had anticipated. But, curious to tell, we felt
but little inclination for food. It was water, bright water, cool,
sparkling water, alone, that we craved. And of this, also, our store at
first seemed ample. But as our voyage lengthened, and breezes blew
faint, and calms fell fast, the idea of being deprived of the precious
fluid grew into something little short of a mono- mania; especially
with Jarl.

Every hour or two with the hammer and chisel belonging to the tinder
box keg, he tinkered away at the invaluable breaker; driving down the
hoops, till in his over solicitude, I thought he would burst them
outright.

Now the breaker lay on its bilge, in the middle of the boat, where more
or less sea-water always collected. And ever and anon, dipping his
finger therein, my Viking was troubled with the thought, that this
sea-water tasted less brackish than that alongside. Of course the
breaker must be leaking. So, he would turn it over, till its wet side
came uppermost; when it would quickly become dry as a bone. But now,
with his knife, he would gently probe the joints of the staves; shake
his head; look up; look down; taste of the water in the bottom of the
boat; then that of the sea; then lift one end of the breaker; going
through with every test of leakage he could dream of. Nor was he ever
fully satisfied, that the breaker was in all respects sound. But in
reality it was tight as the drum-heads that beat at Cerro- Gordo. Oh!
Jarl, Jarl: to me in the boat’s quiet stern, steering and
philosophizing at one time and the same, thou and thy breaker were a
study.

Besides the breaker, we had, full of water, the two boat-kegs,
previously alluded to. These were first used. We drank from them by
their leaden spouts; so many swallows three times in the day; having no
other means of measuring an allowance. But when we came to the breaker,
which had only a bung-hole, though a very large one, dog- like, it was
so many laps apiece; jealously counted by the observer. This plan,
however, was only good for a single day; the water then getting beyond
the reach of the tongue. We therefore daily poured from the breaker
into one of the kegs; and drank from its spout. But to obviate the
absorption inseparable from decanting, we at last hit upon something
better,—my comrade’s shoe, which, deprived of its quarters, narrowed at
the heel, and diligently rinsed out in the sea, was converted into a
handy but rather limber ladle. This we kept suspended in the bung-hole
of the breaker, that it might never twice absorb the water.

Now pewter imparts flavor to ale; a Meerschaum bowl, the same to the
tobacco of Smyrna; and goggle green glasses are deemed indispensable to
the bibbing of Hock. What then shall be said of a leathern goblet for
water? Try it, ye mariners who list.

One morning, taking his wonted draught, Jarl fished up in his ladle a
deceased insect; something like a Daddy-long-legs, only more corpulent.
Its fate? A sea-toss? Believe it not; with all those precious drops
clinging to its lengthy legs. It was held over the ladle till the last
globule dribbled; and even then, being moist, honest Jarl was but loth
to drop it overboard.

For our larder, we could not endure the salt beef; it was raw as a live
Abyssinian steak, and salt as Cracow. Besides, the Feegee simile would
not have held good with respect to it. It was far from being “tender as
a dead man.” The biscuit only could we eat; not to be wondered at; for
even on shipboard, seamen in the tropics are but sparing feeders.

And here let not, a suggestion be omitted, most valuable to any future
castaway or sailaway as the case may be. Eat not your biscuit dry; but
dip it in the sea: which makes it more bulky and palatable. During meal
times it was soak and sip with Jarl and me: one on each side of the
Chamois dipping our biscuit in the brine. This plan obviated
finger-glasses at the conclusion of our repast. Upon the whole,
dwelling upon the water is not so bad after all. The Chinese are no
fools. In the operation of making your toilet, how handy to float in
your ewer!




CHAPTER XV.
A Stitch In Time Saves Nine


Like most silent earnest sort of people, my good Viking was a pattern
of industry. When in the boats after whales, I have known him carry
along a roll of sinnate to stitch into a hat. And the boats lying
motionless for half an hour or so, waiting the rising of the chase, his
fingers would be plying at their task, like an old lady knitting. Like
an experienced old-wife too, his digits had become so expert and
conscientious, that his eyes left them alone; deeming optic supervision
unnecessary. And on this trip of ours, when not otherwise engaged, he
was quite as busy with his fingers as ever: unraveling old Cape Horn
hose, for yarn wherewith to darn our woolen frocks; with great patches
from the skirts of a condemned reefing jacket, panneling the seats of
our “ducks;” in short, veneering our broken garments with all manner of
choice old broadcloths.

With the true forethought of an old tar, he had brought along with him
nearly the whole contents of his chest. His precious “Ditty Bag,”
containing his sewing utensils, had been carefully packed away in the
bottom of one of his bundles; of which he had as many as an old maid on
her travels. In truth, an old salt is very much of an old maid, though,
strictly speaking, far from deserving that misdeemed appellative.
Better be an old maid, a woman with herself for a husband, than the
wife of a fool; and Solomon more than hints that all men are fools; and
every wise man knows himself to be one. When playing the sempstress,
Jarl’s favorite perch was the triangular little platform in the bow;
which being the driest and most elevated part of the boat, was best
adapted to his purpose. Here for hours and hours together the honest
old tailor would sit darning and sewing away, heedless of the wide
ocean around; while forever, his slouched Guayaquil hat kept bobbing up
and down against the horizon before us.

It was a most solemn avocation with him. Silently he nodded like the
still statue in the opera of Don Juan. Indeed he never spoke, unless to
give pithy utterance to the wisdom of keeping one’s wardrobe in repair.
But herein my Viking at times waxed oracular. And many’s the hour we
glided along, myself deeply pondering in the stem, hand upon helm;
while crosslegged at the other end of the boat Jarl laid down patch
upon patch, and at long intervals precept upon precept; here several
saws, and there innumerable stitches.




CHAPTER XVI.
They Are Becalmed


On the eighth day there was a calm.

It came on by night: so that waking at daybreak, and folding my arms
over the gunwale, I looked out upon a scene very hard to describe. The
sun was still beneath the horizon; perhaps not yet out of sight from
the plains of Paraguay. But the dawn was too strong for the stars;
which, one by one, had gone out, like waning lamps after a ball.

Now, as the face of a mirror is a blank, only borrowing character from
what it reflects; so in a calm in the Tropics, a colorless sky
overhead, the ocean, upon its surface, hardly presents a sign of
existence. The deep blue is gone; and the glassy element lies tranced;
almost viewless as the air.

But that morning, the two gray firmaments of sky and water seemed
collapsed into a vague ellipsis. And alike, the Chamois seemed drifting
in the atmosphere as in the sea. Every thing was fused into the calm:
sky, air, water, and all. Not a fish was to be seen. The silence was
that of a vacuum. No vitality lurked in the air. And this inert
blending and brooding of all things seemed gray chaos in conception.

This calm lasted four days and four nights; during which, but a few
cat’s-paws of wind varied the scene. They were faint as the breath of
one dying.

At times the heat was intense. The heavens, at midday, glowing like an
ignited coal mine. Our skin curled up like lint; our vision became dim;
the brain dizzy.

To our consternation, the water in the breaker became lukewarm,
brackish, and slightly putrescent; notwithstanding we kept our spare
clothing piled upon the breaker, to shield it from the sun. At last,
Jarl enlarged the vent, carefully keeping it exposed. To this
precaution, doubtless, we owed more than we then thought. It was now
deemed wise to reduce our allowance of water to the smallest modicum
consistent with the present preservation of life; strangling all desire
for more.

Nor was this all. The upper planking of the boat began to warp; here
and there, cracking and splintering. But though we kept it moistened
with brine, one of the plank-ends started from its place; and the
sharp, sudden sound, breaking the scorching silence, caused us both to
spring to our feet. Instantly the sea burst in; but we made shift to
secure the rebellious plank with a cord, not having a nail; we then
bailed out the boat, nearly half full of water.

On the second day of the calm, we unshipped the mast, to prevent its
being pitched out by the occasional rolling of the vast smooth swells
now overtaking us. Leagues and leagues away, after its fierce raging,
some tempest must have been sending to us its last dying waves. For as
a pebble dropped into a pond ruffles it to its marge; so, on all sides,
a sea-gale operates as if an asteroid had fallen into the brine; making
ringed mountain billows, interminably expanding, instead of ripples.

The great September waves breaking at the base of the Neversink
Highlands, far in advance of the swiftest pilot-boat, carry tidings.
And full often, they know the last secret of many a stout ship, never
heard of from the day she left port. Every wave in my eyes seems a
soul.

As there was no steering to be done, Jarl and I sheltered ourselves as
well as we could under the awning. And for the first two days, one at a
time, and every three or four hours, we dropped overboard for a bath,
clinging to the gun-wale; a sharp look-out being kept for prowling
sharks. A foot or two below the surface, the water felt cool and
refreshing.

On the third day a change came over us. We relinquished bathing, the
exertion taxing us too much. Sullenly we laid ourselves down; turned
our backs to each other; and were impatient of the slightest casual
touch of our persons. What sort of expression my own countenance wore,
I know not; but I hated to look at Jarl’s. When I did it was a glare,
not a glance. I became more taciturn than he. I can not tell what it
was that came over me, but I wished I was alone. I felt that so long as
the calm lasted, we were without help; that neither could assist the
other; and above all, that for one, the water would hold out longer
than for two. I felt no remorse, not the slightest, for these thoughts.
It was instinct. Like a desperado giving up the ghost, I desired to
gasp by myself.

From being cast away with a brother, good God deliver me!

The four days passed. And on the morning of the fifth, thanks be to
Heaven, there came a breeze. Dancingly, mincingly it came, just
rippling the sea, until it struck our sails, previously set at the very
first token of its advance. At length it slightly freshened; and our
poor Chamois seemed raised from the dead.

Beyond expression delightful! Once more we heard the low humming of the
sea under our bow, as our boat, like a bird, went singing on its way.

How changed the scene! Overhead, a sweet blue haze, distilling sunlight
in drops. And flung abroad over the visible creation was the
sun-spangled, azure, rustling robe of the ocean, ermined with wave
crests; all else, infinitely blue. Such a cadence of musical sounds!
Waves chasing each other, and sporting and frothing in frolicsome foam:
painted fish rippling past; and anon the noise of wings as sea- fowls
flew by.

Oh, Ocean, when thou choosest to smile, more beautiful thou art than
flowery mead or plain!




CHAPTER XVII.
In High Spirits, They Push On For The Terra Incognita


There were now fourteen notches on the loom of the Skyeman’s oar:—So
many days since we had pushed from the fore-chains of the Arcturion.
But as yet, no floating bough, no tern, noddy, nor reef-bird, to denote
our proximity to land. In that long calm, whither might not the
currents have swept us?

Where we were precisely, we knew not; but according to our reckoning,
the loose estimation of the knots run every hour, we must have sailed
due west but little more than one hundred and fifty leagues; for the
most part having encountered but light winds, and frequent intermitting
calms, besides that prolonged one described. But spite of past calms
and currents, land there must be to the westward. Sun, compass, stout
hearts, and steady breezes, pointed our prow thereto. So courage! my
Viking, and never say drown!

At this time, our hearts were much lightened by discovering that our
water was improving in taste. It seemed to have been undergoing anew
that sort of fermentation, or working, occasionally incident to ship
water shortly after being taken on board. Sometimes, for a period, it
is more or less offensive to taste and smell; again, however, becoming
comparatively limpid.

But as our water improved, we grew more and more miserly of so
priceless a treasure.

And here it may be well to make mention of another little circumstance,
however unsentimental. Thorough-paced tar that he was, my Viking was an
inordinate consumer of the Indian weed. From the Arcturion, he had
brought along with him a small half-keg, at bottom impacted with a
solitary layer of sable Negrohead, fossil- marked, like the primary
stratum of the geologists. It was the last tier of his abundant supply
for the long whaling voyage upon which he had embarked upwards of three
years previous. Now during the calm, and for some days after, poor
Jarl’s accustomed quid was no longer agreeable company. To pun: he
eschewed his chew. I asked him wherefore. He replied that it puckered
up his mouth, above all provoked thirst, and had somehow grown every
way distasteful. I was sorry; for the absence of his before ever
present wad impaired what little fullness there was left in his cheek;
though, sooth to say, I no longer called upon him as of yore to shift
over the enormous morsel to starboard or larboard, and so trim our
craft.

The calm gone by, once again my sea-tailor plied needle and thread; or
turning laundress, hung our raiment to dry on oars peaked obliquely in
the thole-pins. All of which tattered pennons, the wind being astern,
helped us gayly on our way; as jolly poor devils, with rags flying in
the breeze, sail blithely through life; and are merry although they are
poor!




CHAPTER XVIII.
My Lord Shark And His Pages


There is a fish in the sea that evermore, like a surly lord, only goes
abroad attended by his suite. It is the Shovel-nosed Shark. A clumsy
lethargic monster, unshapely as his name, and the last species of his
kind, one would think, to be so bravely waited upon, as he is. His
suite is composed of those dainty little creatures called Pilot fish by
sailors. But by night his retinue is frequently increased by the
presence of several small luminous fish, running in advance, and
flourishing their flambeaux like link-boys lighting the monster’s way.
Pity there were no ray-fish in rear, page-like, to carry his caudal
train.

Now the relation subsisting between the Pilot fish above mentioned and
their huge ungainly lord, seems one of the most inscrutable things in
nature. At any rate, it poses poor me to comprehend. That a monster so
ferocious, should suffer five or six little sparks, hardly fourteen
inches long, to gambol about his grim hull with the utmost impunity, is
of itself something strange. But when it is considered, that by a
reciprocal understanding, the Pilot fish seem to act as scouts to the
shark, warning him of danger, and apprising him of the vicinity of
prey; and moreover, in case of his being killed, evincing their anguish
by certain agitations, otherwise inexplicable; the whole thing becomes
a mystery unfathomable. Truly marvels abound. It needs no dead man to
be raised, to convince us of some things. Even my Viking marveled full
as much at those Pilot fish as he would have marveled at the Pentecost.

But perhaps a little incident, occurring about this period, will best
illustrate the matter in hand.

We were gliding along, hardly three knots an hour, when my comrade, who
had been dozing over the gunwale, suddenly started to his feet, and
pointed out an immense Shovel-nosed Shark, less than a boat’s length
distant, and about half a fathom beneath the surface. A lance was at
once snatched from its place; and true to his calling, Jarl was about
to dart it at the fish, when, interested by the sight of its radiant
little scouts, I begged him to desist.

One of them was right under the shark, nibbling at his ventral fin;
another above, hovering about his dorsal appurtenance; one on each
flank; and a frisking fifth pranking about his nose, seemingly having
something to say of a confidential nature. They were of a bright,
steel-blue color, alternated with jet black stripes; with glistening
bellies of a silver-white. Clinging to the back of the shark, were four
or five Remoras, or sucking-fish; snaky parasites, impossible to remove
from whatever they adhere to, without destroying their lives. The
Remora has little power in swimming; hence its sole locomotion is on
the backs of larger fish. Leech-like, it sticketh closer than a false
brother in prosperity; closer than a beggar to the benevolent; closer
than Webster to the Constitution. But it feeds upon what it clings to;
its feelers having a direct communication with the esophagus.

The shark swam sluggishly; creating no sign of a ripple, but ever and,
anon shaking his Medusa locks, writhing and curling with horrible life.
Now and then, the nimble Pilot fish darted from his side—this way and
that—mostly toward our boat; but previous to taking a fresh start ever
returning to their liege lord to report progress.

A thought struck me. Baiting a rope’s end with a morsel of our almost
useless salt beef, I suffered it to trail in the sea. Instantly the
foremost scout swam toward it; hesitated; paused; but at last
advancing, briskly snuffed at the line, and taking one finical little
nibble, retreated toward the shark. Another moment, and the great
Tamerlane himself turned heavily about; pointing his black, cannon-like
nose directly toward our broadside. Meanwhile, the little Pilot fish
darted hither and thither; keeping up a mighty fidgeting, like men of
small minds in a state of nervous agitation.

Presently, Tamerlane swam nearer and nearer, all the while lazily
eyeing the Chamois, as a wild boar a kid. Suddenly making a rush for
it, in the foam he made away with the bait. But the next instant, the
uplifted lance sped at his skull; and thrashing his requiem with his
sinewy tail, he sunk slowly, through his own blood, out of sight. Down
with him swam the terrified Pilot fish; but soon after, three of them
were observed close to the boat, gliding along at a uniform pace; one
an each side, and one in advance; even as they had attended their lord.
Doubtless, one was under our keel.

“A good omen,” said Jarl; “no harm will befall us so long as they
stay.”

But however that might be, follow us they did, for many days after:
until an event occurred, which necessitated their withdrawal.




CHAPTER XIX.
Who Goes There?


Jarl’s oar showed sixteen notches on the loom, when one evening, as the
expanded sun touched the horizon’s rim, a ship’s uppermost spars were
observed, traced like a spider’s web against its crimson disk. It
looked like a far-off craft on fire.

In bright weather at sea, a sail, invisible in the full flood of noon,
becomes perceptible toward sunset. It is the reverse in the morning. In
sight at gray dawn, the distant vessel, though in reality approaching,
recedes from view, as the sun rises higher and higher. This holds true,
till its vicinity makes it readily fall within the ordinary scope of
vision. And thus, too, here and there, with other distant things: the
more light you throw on them, the more you obscure. Some revelations
show best in a twilight.

The sight of the stranger not a little surprised us. But brightening
up, as if the encounter were welcome, Jarl looked happy and expectant.
He quickly changed his demeanor, however, upon perceiving that I was
bent upon shunning a meeting.

Instantly our sails were struck; and calling upon Jarl, who was
somewhat backward to obey, I shipped the oars; and, both rowing, we
stood away obliquely from our former course.

I divined that the vessel was a whaler; and hence, that by help of the
glass, with which her look-outs must be momentarily sweeping the
horizon, they might possibly have descried us; especially, as we were
due east from the ship; a direction, which at sunset is the one most
favorable for perceiving a far-off object at sea. Furthermore, our
canvas was snow-white and conspicuous. To be sure, we could not be
certain what kind of a vessel it was; but whatever it might be, I, for
one, had no mind to risk an encounter; for it was quite plain, that if
the stranger came within hailing distance, there would be no resource
but to link our fortunes with hers; whereas I desired to pursue none
but the Chamois’. As for the Skyeman, he kept looking wistfully over
his shoulder; doubtless, praying Heaven, that we might not escape what
I sought to avoid.

Now, upon a closer scrutiny, being pretty well convinced that the
stranger, after all, was steering a nearly westerly course—right away
from us—we reset our sail; and as night fell, my Viking’s entreaties,
seconded by my own curiosity, induced me to resume our original course;
and so follow after the vessel, with a view of obtaining a nearer
glimpse, without danger of detection. So, boldly we steered for the
sail.

But not gaining much upon her, spite of the lightness of the breeze (a
circumstance in our favor: the chase being a ship, and we but a boat),
at my comrade’s instigation, we added oars to sails, readily guiding
our way by the former, though the helm was left to itself.

As we came nearer, it was plain that the vessel was no whaler; but a
small, two-masted craft; in short, a brigantine. Her sails were in a
state of unaccountable disarray, only the foresail, mainsail, and jib
being set. The first was much tattered; and the jib was hoisted but
half way up the stay, where it idly flapped, the breeze coming from
over the taffrail. She continually yawed in her course; now almost
presenting her broadside, then showing her stern.

Striking our sails once more, we lay on our oars, and watched her in
the starlight. Still she swung from side to side, and still sailed on.

Not a little terrified at the sight, superstitious Jarl more than
insinuated that the craft must be a gold-huntress, haunted. But I told
him, that if such were the case, we must board her, come gold or
goblins. In reality, however, I began to think that she must have been
abandoned by her crew; or else, that from sickness, those on board were
incapable of managing her.

After a long and anxious reconnoiter, we came still nearer, using our
oars, but very reluctantly on Jarl’s part; who, while rowing, kept his
eyes over his shoulder, as if about to beach the little Chamois on the
back of a whale as of yore. Indeed, he seemed full as impatient to quit
the vicinity of the vessel, as before he had been anxiously courting
it.

Now, as the silent brigantine again swung round her broadside, I hailed
her loudly. No return. Again. But all was silent. With a few vigorous
strokes, we closed with her, giving yet another unanswered hail; when,
laying the Chamois right alongside, I clutched at the main-chains.
Instantly we felt her dragging us along. Securing our craft by its
painter, I sprang over the rail, followed by Jarl, who had snatched his
harpoon, his favorite arms. Long used with that weapon to overcome the
monsters of the deep, he doubted not it would prove equally serviceable
in any other encounter.

The deck was a complete litter. Tossed about were pearl oyster shells,
husks of cocoa-nuts, empty casks, and cases. The deserted tiller was
lashed; which accounted for the vessel’s yawing. But we could not
conceive, how going large before the wind; the craft could, for any
considerable time, at least, have guided herself without the help of a
hand. Still, the breeze was light and steady.

Now, seeing the helm thus lashed, I could not but distrust the silence
that prevailed. It conjured up the idea of miscreants concealed below,
and meditating treachery; unscrupulous mutineers—Lascars, or
Manilla-men; who, having murdered the Europeans of the crew, might not
be willing to let strangers depart unmolested. Or yet worse, the entire
ship’s company might have been swept away by a fever, its infection
still lurking in the poisoned hull. And though the first conceit, as
the last, was a mere surmise, it was nevertheless deemed prudent to
secure the hatches, which for the present we accordingly barred down
with the oars of our boat. This done, we went about the deck in search
of water. And finding some in a clumsy cask, drank long and freely, and
to our thirsty souls’ content.

The wind now freshening, and the rent sails like to blow from the
yards, we brought the brigantine to the wind, and brailed up the
canvas. This left us at liberty to examine the craft, though,
unfortunately, the night was growing hazy.

All this while our boat was still towing alongside; and I was about to
drop it astern, when Jarl, ever cautious, declared it safer where it
was; since, if there were people on board, they would most likely be
down in the cabin, from the dead-lights of which, mischief might be
done to the Chamois.

It was then, that my comrade observed, that the brigantine had no
boats, a circumstance most unusual in any sort of a vessel at sea. But
marking this, I was exceedingly gratified. It seemed to indicate, as I
had opined, that from some cause or other, she must have been abandoned
of her crew. And in a good measure this dispelled my fears of foul
play, and the apprehension of contagion. Encouraged by these
reflections, I now resolved to descend, and explore the cabin, though
sorely against Jarl’s counsel. To be sure, as he earnestly said, this
step might have been deferred till daylight; but it seemed too
wearisome to wait. So bethinking me of our tinder-box and candles, I
sent him into the boat for them. Presently, two candles were lit; one
of which the Skyeman tied up and down the barbed end of his harpoon; so
that upon going below, the keen steel might not be far off, should the
light be blown out by a dastard.

Unfastening the cabin scuttle, we stepped downward into the smallest
and murkiest den in the world. The altar-like transom, surmounted by
the closed dead-lights in the stem, together with the dim little sky-
light overhead, and the somber aspect of every thing around, gave the
place the air of some subterranean oratory, say a Prayer Room of Peter
the Hermit. But coils of rigging, bolts of canvas, articles of
clothing, and disorderly heaps of rubbish, harmonized not with this
impression. Two doors, one on each side, led into wee little state-
rooms, the berths of which also were littered. Among other things, was
a large box, sheathed with iron and stoutly clamped, containing a keg
partly filled with powder, the half of an old cutlass, a pouch of
bullets, and a case for a sextant—a brass plate on the lid, with the
maker’s name. London. The broken blade of the cutlass was very rusty
and stained; and the iron hilt bent in. It looked so tragical that I
thrust it out of sight.

Removing a small trap-door, opening into the space beneath, called the
“run,” we lighted upon sundry cutlasses and muskets, lying together at
sixes and sevens, as if pitched down in a hurry.

Casting round a hasty glance, and satisfying ourselves, that through
the bulkhead of the cabin, there was no passage to the forward part of
the hold, we caught up the muskets and cutlasses, the powder keg and
the pouch of bullets, and bundling them on deck, prepared to visit the
other end of the vessel. Previous to so doing, however, I loaded a
musket, and belted a cutlass to my side. But my Viking preferred his
harpoon.

In the forecastle reigned similar confusion. But there was a snug
little lair, cleared away in one corner, and furnished with a grass mat
and bolster, like those used among the Islanders of these seas. This
little lair looked to us as if some leopard had crouched there. And as
it turned out, we were not far from right. Forming one side of this
retreat, was a sailor’s chest, stoutly secured by a lock, and monstrous
heavy withal. Regardless of Jarl’s entreaties, I managed to burst the
lid; thereby revealing a motley assemblage of millinery, and outlandish
knick-knacks of all sorts; together with sundry rude Calico
contrivances, which though of unaccountable cut, nevertheless possessed
a certain petticoatish air, and latitude of skirt, betokening them the
habiliments of some feminine creature; most probably of the human
species.

In this strong box, also, was a canvas bag, jingling with rusty old
bell-buttons, gangrened copper bolts, and sheathing nails; damp,
greenish Carolus dollars (true coin all), besides divers iron screws,
and battered, chisels, and belaying-pins. Sounded on the chest lid, the
dollars rang clear as convent bells. These were put aside by Jarl the
sight of substantial dollars doing away, for the nonce, with his
superstitious Misgivings. True to his kingship, he loved true coin;
though abroad on the sea, and no land but dollarless dominions ground,
all this silver was worthless as charcoal or diamonds. Nearly one and
the same thing, say the chemists; but tell that to the marines, say the
illiterate Jews and the jewelers. Go, buy a house, or a ship, if you
can, with your charcoal! Yea, all the woods in Canada charred down to
cinders would not be worth the one famed Brazilian diamond, though no
bigger than the egg of a carrier pigeon. Ah! but these chemists are
liars, and Sir Humphrey Davy a cheat. Many’s the poor devil they’ve
deluded into the charcoal business, who otherwise might have made his
fortune with a mattock.

Groping again into the chest, we brought to light a queer little hair
trunk, very bald and rickety. At every corner was a mighty clamp, the
weight of which had no doubt debilitated the box. It was jealously
secured with a padlock, almost as big as itself; so that it was almost
a question, which was meant to be security to the other. Prying at it
hard, we at length effected an entrance; but saw no golden moidores, no
ruddy doubloons; nothing under heaven but three pewter mugs, such as
are used in a ship’s cabin, several brass screws, and brass plates,
which must have belonged to a quadrant; together with a famous lot of
glass beads, and brass rings; while, pasted on the inside of the cover,
was a little colored print, representing the harlots, the shameless
hussies, having a fine time with the Prodigal Son.

It should have been mentioned ere now, that while we were busy in the
forecastle, we were several times startled by strange sounds aloft. And
just after, crashing into the little hair trunk, down came a great
top-block, right through the scuttle, narrowly missing my Viking’s
crown; a much stronger article, by the way, than your goldsmiths turn
out in these days. This startled us much; particularly Jarl, as one
might suppose; but accustomed to the strange creakings and wheezings of
the masts and yards of old vessels at sea, and having many a time
dodged stray blocks accidentally falling from aloft, I thought little
more of the matter; though my comrade seemed to think the noises
somewhat different from any thing of that kind he had even heard
before.

After a little more turning over of the rubbish in the forecastle, and
much marveling thereat, we ascended to the deck; where we found every
thing so silent, that, as we moved toward the taffrail, the Skyeman
unconsciously addressed me in a whisper.




CHAPTER XX.
Noises And Portents


I longed for day. For however now inclined to believe that the
brigantine was untenanted, I desired the light of the sun to place that
fact beyond a misgiving.

Now, having observed, previous to boarding the vessel, that she lay
rather low in the water, I thought proper to sound the well. But there
being no line-and-sinker at hand, I sent Jarl to hunt them up in the
arm-chest on the quarter-deck, where doubtless they must be kept.
Meanwhile I searched for the “breaks,” or pump-handles, which, as it
turned out, could not have been very recently used; for they were found
lashed up and down to the main-mast.

Suddenly Jarl came running toward me, whispering that all doubt was
dispelled;—there were spirits on board, to a dead certainty. He had
overheard a supernatural sneeze. But by this time I was all but
convinced, that we were alone in the brigantine. Since, if otherwise, I
could assign no earthly reason for the crew’s hiding away from a couple
of sailors, whom, were they so minded, they might easily have mastered.
And furthermore, this alleged disturbance of the atmosphere aloft by a
sneeze, Jarl averred to have taken place in the main-top; directly
underneath which I was all this time standing, and had heard nothing.
So complimenting my good Viking upon the exceeding delicacy of his
auriculars, I bade him trouble himself no more with his piratical
ghosts and goblins, which existed nowhere but in his own imagination.

Not finding the line-and-sinker, with the spare end of a bowline we
rigged a substitute; and sounding the well, found nothing to excite our
alarm. Under certain circumstances, however, this sounding a ship’s
well is a nervous sort of business enough. ’Tis like feeling your own
pulse in the last stage of a fever.

At the Skyeman’s suggestion, we now proceeded to throw round the
brigantine’s head on the other tack. For until daylight we desired to
alter the vessel’s position as little as possible, fearful of coming
unawares upon reefs.

And here be it said, that for all his superstitious misgivings about
the brigantine; his imputing to her something equivalent to a purely
phantom-like nature, honest Jarl was nevertheless exceedingly downright
and practical in all hints and proceedings concerning her. Wherein, he
resembled my Right Reverend friend, Bishop Berkeley—truly, one of your
lords spiritual—who, metaphysically speaking, holding all objects to be
mere optical delusions, was, notwith- standing, extremely
matter-of-fact in all matters touching matter itself. Besides being
pervious to the points of pins, and possessing a palate capable of
appreciating plum-puddings:—which sentence reads off like a pattering
of hailstones.

Now, while we were employed bracing round the yards, whispering Jarl
must needs pester me again with his confounded suspicions of goblins on
board. He swore by the main-mast, that when the fore-yard swung round,
he had heard a half-stifled groan from that quarter; as if one of his
bugbears had been getting its aerial legs jammed. I laughed:—hinting
that goblins were incorporeal. Whereupon he besought me to ascend the
fore-rigging and test the matter for myself But here my mature judgment
got the better of my first crude opinion. I civilly declined. For
assuredly, there was still a possibility, that the fore-top might be
tenanted, and that too by living miscreants; and a pretty hap would be
mine, if, with hands full of rigging, and legs dangling in air, while
surmounting the oblique futtock- shrouds, some unseen arm should all at
once tumble me overboard. Therefore I held my peace; while Jarl went on
to declare, that with regard to the character of the brigantine, his
mind was now pretty fully made up;—she was an arrant impostor, a shade
of a ship, full of sailors’ ghosts, and before we knew where we were,
would dissolve in a supernatural squall, and leave us twain in the
water. In short, Jarl, the descendant of the superstitious old
Norsemen, was full of old Norse conceits, and all manner of Valhalla
marvels concerning the land of goblins and goblets. No wonder then,
that with this catastrophe in prospect, he again entreated me to quit
the ill-starred craft, carrying off nothing from her ghostly hull. But
I refused.

One can not relate every thing at once. While in the cabin, we came
across a “barge” of biscuit, and finding its contents of a quality much
superior to our own, we had filled our pockets and occasionally regaled
ourselves in the intervals of rummaging. Now this sea cake- basket we
had brought on deck. And for the first time since bidding adieu to the
Arcturion having fully quenched our thirst, our appetite returned with
a rush; and having nothing better to do till day dawned, we planted the
bread-barge in the middle of the quarter-deck; and crossing our legs
before it, laid close seige thereto, like the Grand Turk and his Vizier
Mustapha sitting down before Vienna.

Our castle, the Bread-Barge was of the common sort; an oblong oaken
box, much battered and bruised, and like the Elgin Marbles, all over
inscriptions and carving:—foul anchors, skewered hearts, almanacs,
Burton-blocks, love verses, links of cable, Kings of Clubs; and divers
mystic diagrams in chalk, drawn by old Finnish mariners; in casting
horoscopes and prophecies. Your old tars are all Daniels. There was a
round hole in one side, through which, in getting at the bread, invited
guests thrust their hands.

And mighty was the thrusting of hands that night; also, many and
earnest the glances of Mustapha at every sudden creaking of the spars
or rigging. Like Belshazzar, my royal Viking ate with great fear and
trembling; ever and anon pausing to watch the wild shadows flitting
along the bulwarks.




CHAPTER XXI.
Man Ho!


Slowly, fitfully, broke the morning in the East, showing the desolate
brig forging heavily through the water, which sluggishly thumped under
her bows. While leaping from sea to sea, our faithful Chamois, like a
faithful dog, still gamboled alongside, confined to the main- chains by
its painter. At times, it would long lag behind; then, pushed by a wave
like lightning dash forward; till bridled by its leash, it again fell
in rear.

As the gray light came on, anxiously we scrutinized the features of the
craft, as one by one they became more plainly revealed. Every thing
seemed stranger now, than when partially visible in the dingy night.
The stanchions, or posts of the bulwarks, were of rough stakes, still
incased in the bark. The unpainted sides were of a dark-colored,
heathenish looking wood. The tiller was a wry-necked, elbowed bough,
thrusting itself through the deck, as if the tree itself was fast
rooted in the hold. The binnacle, containing the compass, was defended
at the sides by yellow matting. The rigging—shrouds, halyards and
all—was of “Kaiar,” or cocoa-nut fibres; and here and there the sails
were patched with plaited rushes.

But this was not all. Whoso will pry, must needs light upon matters for
suspicion. Glancing over the side, in the wake of every scupper- hole,
we beheld a faded, crimson stain, which Jarl averred to be blood.
Though now he betrayed not the slightest trepidation; for what he saw
pertained not to ghosts; and all his fears hitherto had been of the
super-natural.

Indeed, plucking up a heart, with the dawn of the day my Viking looked
bold as a lion; and soon, with the instinct of an old seaman cast his
eyes up aloft.

Directly, he touched my arm,—“Look: what stirs in the main-top?”

Sure enough, something alive was there.

Fingering our arms, we watched it; till as the day came on, a crouching
stranger was beheld.

Presenting my piece, I hailed him to descend or be shot. There was
silence for a space, when the black barrel of a musket was thrust
forth, leveled at my head. Instantly, Jarl’s harpoon was presented at a
dart;—two to one;—and my hail was repeated. But no reply.

“Who are you?”

“Samoa,” at length said a clear, firm voice.

“Come down from the rigging. We are friends.”

Another pause; when, rising to his feet, the stranger slowly descended,
holding on by one hand to the rigging, for but one did he have; his
musket partly slung from his back, and partly griped under the stump of
his mutilated arm.

He alighted about six paces from where we stood; and balancing his
weapon, eyed us bravely as the Cid.

He was a tall, dark Islander, a very devil to behold, theatrically
arrayed in kilt and turban; the kilt of a gay calico print, the turban
of a red China silk. His neck was jingling with strings of beads.

“Who else is on board?” I asked; while Jarl, thus far covering the
stranger with his weapon, now dropped it to the deck.

“Look there:—Annatoo!” was his reply in broken English, pointing aloft
to the fore-top. And lo! a woman, also an Islander; and barring her
skirts, dressed very much like Samoa, was beheld descending.

“Any more?”

“No more.”

“Who are _you_ then; and what craft is this?”

“Ah, ah—you are no ghost;—but are you my friend?” he cried, advancing
nearer as he spoke; while the woman having gained the deck, also
approached, eagerly glancing.

We said we were friends; that we meant no harm; but desired to know
what craft this was; and what disaster had befallen her; for that
something untoward had occurred, we were certain.

Whereto, Samoa made answer, that it was true that something dreadful
had happened; and that he would gladly tell us all, and tell us the
truth. And about it he went.

Now, this story of his was related in the mixed phraseology of a
Polynesian sailor. With a few random reflections, in substance, it will
be found in the six following chapters.




CHAPTER XXII.
What Befel The Brigantine At The Pearl Shell Islands


The vessel was the Parki, of Lahina, a village and harbor on the coast
of Mowee, one of the Hawaian isles, where she had been miserably
cobbled together with planks of native wood, and fragments of a wreck,
there drifted ashore.

Her appellative had been bestowed in honor of a high chief, the tallest
and goodliest looking gentleman in all the Sandwich Islands. With a
mixed European and native crew, about thirty in number (but only four
whites in all, captain included), the Parki, some four months previous,
had sailed from her port on a voyage southward, in quest of pearls, and
pearl oyster shells, sea-slugs, and other matters of that sort.

Samoa, a native of the Navigator Islands, had long followed the sea,
and was well versed in the business of oyster diving and its submarine
mysteries. The native Lahineese on board were immediately subordinate
to him; the captain having bargained with Samoa for their services as
divers.

The woman, Annatoo, was a native of a far-off, anonymous island to the
westward: whence, when quite young, she had been carried by the
commander of a ship, touching there on a passage from Macao to
Valparaiso. At Valparaiso her protector put her ashore; most probably,
as I afterward had reason to think, for a nuisance.

By chance it came to pass that when Annatoo’s first virgin bloom had
departed, leaving nothing but a lusty frame and a lustier soul, Samoa,
the Navigator, had fallen desperately in love with her. And thinking
the lady to his mind, being brave like himself, and doubtless well
adapted to the vicissitudes of matrimony at sea, he meditated suicide—I
would have said, wedlock—and the twain became one. And some time after,
in capacity of wife, Annatoo the dame, accompanied in the brigantine,
Samoa her lord. Now, as Antony flew to the refuse embraces of Caesar,
so Samoa solaced himself in the arms of this discarded fair one. And
the sequel was the same. For not harder the life Cleopatra led my fine
frank friend, poor Mark, than Queen Annatoo did lead this captive of
her bow and her spear. But all in good time.

They left their port; and crossing the Tropic and the Line, fell in
with a cluster of islands, where the shells they sought were found in
round numbers. And here—not at all strange to tell besides the natives,
they encountered a couple of Cholos, or half-breed Spaniards, from the
Main; one half Spanish, the other half quartered between the wild
Indian and the devil; a race, that from Baldivia to Panama are
notorious for their unscrupulous villainy.

Now, the half-breeds having long since deserted a ship at these
islands, had risen to high authority among the natives. This hearing,
the Parki’s captain was much gratified; he, poor ignorant, never before
having fallen in with any of their treacherous race. And, no doubt, he
imagined that their influence over the Islanders would tend to his
advantage. At all events, he made presents to the Cholos; who, in turn,
provided him with additional divers from among the natives. Very
kindly, also, they pointed out the best places for seeking the oysters.
In a word, they were exceedingly friendly; often coming off to the
brigantine, and sociably dining with the captain in the cabin; placing
the salt between them and him.

All things went on very pleasantly until, one morning, the half- breeds
prevailed upon the captain to go with them, in his whale-boat, to a
shoal on the thither side of the island, some distance from the spot
where lay the brigantine. They so managed it, moreover, that none but
the Lahineese under Samoa, in whom the captain much confided, were left
in custody of the Parki; the three white men going along to row; for
there happened to be little or no wind for a sail.

Now, the fated brig lay anchored within a deep, smooth, circular
lagoon, margined on all sides but one by the most beautiful groves. On
that side, was the outlet to the sea; perhaps a cable’s length or more
from where the brigantine had been moored. An hour or two after the
party were gone, and when the boat was completely out of sight, the
natives in shoals were perceived coming off from the shore; some in
canoes, and some swimming. The former brought bread fruit and bananas,
ostentatiously piled up in their proas; the latter dragged after them
long strings of cocoanuts; for all of which, on nearing the vessel,
they clamorously demanded knives and hatchets in barter.

From their actions, suspecting some treachery, Samoa stood in the
gangway, and warned them off; saying that no barter could take place
until the captain’s return. But presently one of the savages stealthily
climbed up from the water, and nimbly springing from the bob-stays to
the bow-sprit, darted a javelin full at the foremast, where it
vibrated. The signal of blood! With terrible outcries, the rest,
pulling forth their weapons, hitherto concealed in the canoes, or under
the floating cocoanuts, leaped into the low chains of the brigantine;
sprang over the bulwarks; and, with clubs and spears, attacked the
aghast crew with the utmost ferocity.

After one faint rally, the Lahineese scrambled for the rigging; but to
a man were overtaken and slain.

At the first alarm, Annatoo, however, had escaped to the
fore-top-gallant-yard, higher than which she could not climb, and
whither the savages durst not venture. For though after their nuts
these Polynesians will climb palm trees like squirrels; yet, at the
first blush, they decline a ship’s mast like Kennebec farmers.

Upon the first token of an onslaught, Samoa, having rushed toward the
cabin scuttle for arms, was there fallen upon by two young savages. But
after a desperate momentary fray, in which his arm was mangled, he made
shift to spring below, instantly securing overhead the slide of the
scuttle. In the cabin, while yet the uproar of butchery prevailed, he
quietly bound up his arm; then laying on the transom the captain’s
three loaded muskets, undauntedly awaited an assault.

The object of the natives, it seems, was to wreck the brigantine upon
the sharp coral beach of the lagoon. And with this intent, one of their
number had plunged into the water, and cut the cable, which was of
hemp. But the tide ebbing, cast the Parki’s head seaward—toward the
outlet; and the savages, perceiving this, clumsily boarded the
fore-tack, and hauled aft the sheet; thus setting, after a fashion, the
fore-sail, previously loosed to dry.

Meanwhile, a gray-headed old chief stood calmly at the tiller,
endeavoring to steer the vessel shoreward. But not managing the helm
aright, the brigantine, now gliding apace through the water, only made
more way toward the outlet. Seeing which, the ringleaders, six or eight
in number, ran to help the old graybeard at the helm. But it was a
black hour for them. Of a sudden, while they were handling the tiller,
three muskets were rapidly discharged upon them from the cabin
skylight. Two of the savages dropped dead. The old steersman, clutching
wildly at the helm, fell over it, mortally wounded; and in a wild panic
at seeing their leaders thus unaccountably slain, the rest of the
natives leaped overboard and made for the shore.

Hearing the slashing, Samoa flew on deck; and beholding the foresail
set, and the brigantine heading right out to sea, he cried out to
Annatoo, still aloft, to descend to the topsail-yard, and loose the
canvas there. His command was obeyed. Annatoo deserved a gold medal for
what she did that day. Hastening down the rigging, after loosing the
topsail, she strained away at the sheets; in which operation she was
assisted by Samoa, who snatched an instant from the helm.

The foresail and fore-topsail were now tolerably well set; and as the
craft drew seaward, the breeze freshened. And well that it did; for,
recovered from their alarm, the savages were now in hot pursuit; some
in canoes, and some swimming as before. But soon the main-topsail was
given to the breeze, which still freshening, came from over the
quarter. And with this brave show of canvas, the Parki made gallantly
for the outlet; and loud shouted Samoa as she shot by the reef, and
parted the long swells without. Against these, the savages could not
swim. And at that turn of the tide, paddling a canoe therein was almost
equally difficult. But the fugitives were not yet safe. In full chase
now came in sight the whale-boat manned by the Cholos, and four or five
Islanders. Whereat, making no doubt, that all the whites who left the
vessel that morning had been massacred through the treachery of the
half-breeds; and that the capture of the brigantine had been
premeditated; Samoa now saw no other resource than to point his craft
dead away from the land.

Now on came the devils buckling to their oars. Meantime Annatoo was
still busy aloft, loosing the smaller sails—t’gallants and royals,
which she managed partially to set.

The strong breeze from astern now filling the ill-set sails, they
bellied, and rocked in the air, like balloons, while, from the novel
strain upon it, every spar quivered and sprung. And thus, like a
frightened gull fleeing from sea-hawks, the little Parki swooped along,
and bravely breasted the brine.

His shattered arm in a hempen sling, Samoa stood at the helm, the
muskets reloaded, and planted full before him on the binnacle. For a
time, so badly did the brigantine steer, by reason of her ill- adjusted
sails, made still more unmanageable by the strength of the breeze,—that
it was doubtful, after all, notwithstanding her start, whether the
fugitives would not yet fall a prey to their hunters. The craft wildly
yawed, and the boat drew nearer and nearer. Maddened by the sight, and
perhaps thinking more of revenge for the past, than of security for the
future, Samoa, yielding the helm to Annatoo, rested his muskets on the
bulwarks, and taking long, sure aim, discharged them, one by one at the
advancing foe.

The three reports were answered by loud jeers from the savages, who
brandished their spears, and made gestures of derision; while with
might and main the Cholos tugged at their oars.

The boat still gaining on the brigantine, the muskets were again
reloaded. And as the next shot sped, there was a pause; when, like
lightning, the headmost Cholo bounded upwards from his seat, and oar in
hand, fell into the sea. A fierce yell; and one of the natives
springing into the water, caught the sinking body by its long hair; and
the dead and the living were dragged into the boat. Taking heart from
this fatal shot, Samoa fired yet again; but not with the like sure
result; merely grazing the remaining half-breed, who, crouching behind
his comrades, besought them to turn the boat round, and make for the
shore. Alarmed at the fate of his brother, and seemingly distrustful of
the impartiality of Samoa’s fire, the pusillanimous villain refused to
expose a limb above the gunwale.

Fain now would the pursuers have made good their escape; but an
accident forbade. In the careening of the boat, when the stricken Cholo
sprung overboard, two of their oars had slid into the water; and
together with that death-griped by the half-breed, were now floating
off; occasionally lost to view, as they sunk in the trough of the sea.
Two of the Islanders swam to recover them; but frightened by the
whirring of a shot over their heads, as they unavoidably struck out
towards the Parki, they turned quickly about; just in time to see one
of their comrades smite his body with his hand, as he received a bullet
from Samoa.

Enough: darting past the ill-fated boat, they swam rapidly for land,
followed by the rest; who plunged overboard, leaving in the boat the
surviving Cholo—who it seems could not swim—the wounded savage, and the
dead man.

“Load away now, and take thy revenge, my fine fellow,” said Samoa to
himself. But not yet. Seeing all at his mercy, and having none, he
quickly laid his fore-topsail to the mast; “hove to” the brigantine;
and opened fire anew upon the boat; every swell of the sea heaving it
nearer and nearer. Vain all efforts to escape. The wounded man paddled
wildly with his hands the dead one rolled from side to side; and the
Cholo, seizing the solitary oar, in his frenzied heedlessness, spun the
boat round and round; while all the while shot followed shot, Samoa
firing as fast as Annatoo could load. At length both Cholo and savage
fell dead upon their comrades, canting the boat over sideways, till
well nigh awash; in which manner she drifted off.




CHAPTER XXIII.
Sailing From The Island They Pillage The Cabin


There was a small carronade on the forecastle, unshipped from its
carriage, and lashed down to ringbolts on the deck. This Samoa now
loaded; and with an ax knocking off the round knob upon the breech,
rammed it home in the tube. When, running the cannon out at one of the
ports, and studying well his aim, he let fly, sunk the boat, and buried
his dead.

It was now late in the afternoon; and for the present bent upon
avoiding land, and gaining the shoreless sea, never mind where, Samoa
again forced round his craft before the wind, leaving the island
astern. The decks were still cumbered with the bodies of the Lahineese,
which heel to point and crosswise, had, log-like, been piled up on the
main-hatch. These, one by one, were committed to the sea; after which,
the decks were washed down.

At sunrise next morning, finding themselves out of sight of land, with
little or no wind, they stopped their headway, and lashed the tiller
alee, the better to enable them to overhaul the brigantine; especially
the recesses of the cabin. For there, were stores of goods adapted for
barter among the Islanders; also several bags of dollars.

Now, nothing can exceed the cupidity of the Polynesian, when, through
partial commerce with the whites, his eyes are opened to his nakedness,
and he perceives that in some things they are richer than himself.

The poor skipper’s wardrobe was first explored; his chests of clothes
being capsized, and their contents strown about the cabin floor.

Then took place the costuming. Samoa and Annatoo trying on coats and
pantaloons, shirts and drawers, and admiring themselves in the little
mirror panneled in the bulk-head. Then, were broken open boxes and
bales; rolls of printed cotton were inspected, and vastly admired;
insomuch, that the trumpery found in the captain’s chests was
disdainfully doffed: and donned were loose folds of calico, more
congénial to their tastes.

As case after case was opened and overturned, slippery grew the cabin
deck with torrents of glass beads; and heavy the necks of Samoa and
Annatoo with goodly bunches thereof.

Among other things, came to light brass jewelry,—Rag Fair gewgaws and
baubles a plenty, more admired than all; Annatoo, bedecking herself
like, a tragedy queen: one blaze of brass. Much mourned the married
dame, that thus arrayed, there was none to admire but Samoa her
husband; but he was all the while admiring himself, and not her.

And here must needs be related, what has hitherto remained unsaid. Very
often this husband and wife were no Darby and Joan. Their married life
was one long campaign, whereof the truces were only by night. They
billed and they cooed on their arms, rising fresh in the morning to
battle, and often Samoa got more than a hen-pecking. To be short,
Annatoo was a Tartar, a regular Calmuc, and Samoa—Heaven help him—her
husband.

Yet awhile, joined together by a sense of common danger, and long
engrossed in turning over their tinsel acquisitions without present
thought of proprietorship, the pair refrained from all squabbles. But
soon burst the storm. Having given every bale and every case a good
shaking, Annatoo, making an estimate of the whole, very coolly
proceeded to set apart for herself whatever she fancied. To this, Samoa
objected; to which objection Annatoo objected; and then they went at
it.

The lady vowed that the things were no more Samoa’s than hers; nay, not
so much; and that whatever she wanted, that same would she have. And
furthermore, by way of codicil, she declared that she was slave to
nobody.

Now, Samoa, sad to tell, stood in no little awe of his bellicose
spouse. What, though a hero in other respects; what, though he had
slain his savages, and gallantly carried his craft from their
clutches:—Like the valiant captains Marlborough and Belisarius, he was
a poltroon to his wife. And Annatoo was worse than either Sarah or
Antonina.

However, like every thing partaking of the nature of a scratch, most
conjugal squabbles are quickly healed; for if they healed not, they
would never anew break out: which is the beauty of the thing. So at
length they made up but the treaty stipulations of Annatoo told much
against the interests of Samoa. Nevertheless, ostensibly, it was agreed
upon, that they should strictly go halves; the lady, however, laying
special claim to certain valuables, more particularly fancied. But as a
set-off to this, she generously renounced all claims upon the spare
rigging; all claims upon the fore-mast and mainmast; and all claims
upon the captain’s arms and ammunition. Of the latter, by the way, Dame
Antonina stood in no need. Her voice was a park of artillery; her
talons a charge of bayonets.




CHAPTER XXIV.
Dedicated To The College Of Physicians And Surgeons


By this time Samoa’s wounded arm was in such a state, that amputation
became necessary. Among savages, severe personal injuries are, for the
most part, accounted but trifles. When a European would be taking to
his couch in despair, the savage would disdain to recline.

More yet. In Polynesia, every man is his own barber and surgeon,
cutting off his beard or arm, as occasion demands. No unusual thing,
for the warriors of Varvoo to saw off their own limbs, desperately
wounded in battle. But owing to the clumsiness of the instrument
employed—a flinty, serrated shell—the operation has been known to last
several days. Nor will they suffer any friend to help them;
maintaining, that a matter so nearly concerning a warrior is far better
attended to by himself. Hence it may be said, that they amputate
themselves at their leisure, and hang up their tools when tired. But,
though thus beholden to no one for aught connected with the practice of
surgery, they never cut off their own heads, that ever I heard; a
species of amputation to which, metaphorically speaking, many would-be
independent sort of people in civilized lands are addicted.

Samoa’s operation was very summary. A fire was kindled in the little
caboose, or cook-house, and so made as to produce much smoke. He then
placed his arm upon one of the windlass bitts (a short upright timber,
breast-high), and seizing the blunt cook’s ax would have struck the
blow; but for some reason distrusting the precision of his aim, Annatoo
was assigned to the task. Three strokes, and the limb, from just above
the elbow, was no longer Samoa’s; and he saw his own bones; which many
a centenarian can not say. The very clumsiness of the operation was
safety to the subject. The weight and bluntness of the instrument both
deadened the pain and lessened the hemorrhage. The wound was then
scorched, and held over the smoke of the fire, till all signs of blood
vanished. From that day forward it healed, and troubled Samoa but
little.

But shall the sequel be told? How that, superstitiously averse to
burying in the sea the dead limb of a body yet living; since in that
case Samoa held, that he must very soon drown and follow it; and how,
that equally dreading to keep the thing near him, he at last hung it
aloft from the topmast-stay; where yet it was suspended, bandaged over
and over in cerements. The hand that must have locked many others in
friendly clasp, or smote a foe, was no food, thought Samoa, for fowls
of the air nor fishes of the sea.

Now, which was Samoa? The dead arm swinging high as Haman? Or the
living trunk below? Was the arm severed from the body, or the body from
the arm? The residual part of Samoa was alive, and therefore we say it
was he. But which of the writhing sections of a ten times severed worm,
is the worm proper?

For myself, I ever regarded Samoa as but a large fragment of a man, not
a man complete. For was he not an entire limb out of pocket? And the
action at Teneriffe over, great Nelson himself—physiologically
speaking—was but three-quarters of a man. And the smoke of Waterloo
blown by, what was Anglesea but the like? After Saratoga, what Arnold?
To say nothing of Mutius Scaevola minus a hand, General Knox a thumb,
and Hannibal an eye; and that old Roman grenadier, Dentatus, nothing
more than a bruised and battered trunk, a knotty sort of hemlock of a
warrior, hard to hack and hew into chips, though much marred in
symmetry by battle-ax blows. Ah! but these warriors, like anvils, will
stand a deal of hard hammering. Especially in the old knight-errant
times. For at the battle of Brevieux in Flanders, my glorious old
gossiping ancestor, Froissart, informs me, that ten good knights, being
suddenly unhorsed, fell stiff and powerless to the plain, fatally
encumbered by their armor. Whereupon, the rascally burglarious
peasants, their foes, fell to picking their visors; as burglars, locks;
or oystermen, oysters; to get at their lives. But all to no purpose.
And at last they were fain to ask aid of a blacksmith; and not till
then, were the inmates of the armor dispatched. Now it was deemed very
hard, that the mysterious state- prisoner of France should be riveted
in an iron mask; but these knight-errants did voluntarily prison
themselves in their own iron Bastiles; and thus helpless were murdered
there-in. Days of chivalry these, when gallant chevaliers died
chivalric deaths!

And this was the epic age, over whose departure my late eloquent and
prophetic friend and correspondent, Edmund Burke, so movingly mourned.
Yes, they were glorious times. But no sensible man, given to quiet
domestic delights, would exchange his warm fireside and muffins, for a
heroic bivouac, in a wild beechen wood, of a raw gusty morning in
Normandy; every knight blowing his steel-gloved fingers, and vainly
striving to cook his cold coffee in his helmet.




CHAPTER XXV.
Peril A Peace-Maker


A few days passed: the brigantine drifting hither and thither, and
nothing in sight but the sea, when forth again on its stillness rung
Annatoo’s domestic alarum. The truce was up. Most egregiously had the
lady infringed it; appropriating to herself various objects previously
disclaimed in favor of Samoa. Besides, forever on the prowl, she was
perpetually going up and down; with untiring energy, exploring every
nook and cranny; carrying off her spoils and diligently secreting them.
Having little idea of feminine adaptations, she pilfered whatever came
handy:—iron hooks, dollars, bolts, hatchets, and stopping not at balls
of marline and sheets of copper. All this, poor Samoa would have borne
with what patience he might, rather than again renew the war, were it
not, that the audacious dame charged him with peculations upon her own
private stores; though of any such thing he was innocent as the
bowsprit.

This insulting impeachment got the better of the poor islander’s
philosophy. He keenly resented it. And the consequence was, that seeing
all domineering useless, Annatoo flew off at a tangent; declaring that,
for the future, Samoa might stay by himself; she would have nothing
more to do with him. Save when unavoidable in managing the brigantine,
she would not even speak to him, that she wouldn’t, the monster! She
then boldly demanded the forecastle—in the brig’s case, by far the
pleasantest end of the ship—for her own independent suite of
apartments. As for hapless Belisarius, he might do what he pleased in
his dark little den of a cabin.

Concerning the division of the spoils, the termagant succeeded in
carrying the day; also, to her quarters, bale after bale of goods,
together with numerous odds and ends, sundry and divers. Moreover, she
laid in a fine stock of edibles, so as, in all respects possible, to
live independent of her spouse.

Unlovely Annatoo! Unfortunate Samoa! Thus did the pair make a divorce
of it; the lady going upon a separate maintenance,—and Belisarius
resuming his bachelor loneliness. In the captain’s state room, all cold
and comfortless, he slept; his lady whilome retiring to her forecastle
boudoir; beguiling the hours in saying her pater-nosters, and tossing
over and assorting her ill-gotten trinkets and finery; like Madame De
Maintenon dedicating her last days and nights to continence and
calicoes.

But think you this was the quiet end of their conjugal quarrels? Ah,
no! No end to those feuds, till one or t’other gives up the ghost.

Now, exiled from the nuptial couch, Belisarius bore the hardship
without a murmur. And hero that he was, who knows that he felt not like
a soldier on a furlough? But as for Antonina, she could neither get
along with Belisarius, nor without him. She made advances. But of what
sort? Why, breaking into the cabin and purloining sundry goods
therefrom; in artful hopes of breeding a final reconciliation out of
the temporary outburst that might ensue.

Then followed a sad scene of altercation; interrupted at last by a
sudden loud roaring of the sea. Rushing to the deck, they beheld
themselves sweeping head-foremost toward a shoal making out from a
cluster of low islands, hitherto, by banks of clouds, shrouded from
view.

The helm was instantly shifted; and the yards braced about. But for
several hours, owing to the freshness of the breeze, the set of the
currents, and the irregularity and extent of the shoal, it seemed
doubtful whether they would escape a catastrophe. But Samoa’s
seamanship, united to Annatoo’s industry, at last prevailed; and the
brigantine was saved.

Of the land where they came so near being wrecked, they knew nothing;
and for that reason, they at once steered away. For after the fatal
events which had overtaken the Parki at the Pearl Shell islands, so
fearful were they of encountering any Islanders, that from the first
they had resolved to keep open sea, shunning every appearance of land;
relying upon being eventually picked up by some passing sail.

Doubtless this resolution proved their salvation. For to the navigator
in these seas, no risk so great, as in approaching the isles; which
mostly are so guarded by outpost reefs, and far out from their margins
environed by perils, that the green flowery field within, lies like a
rose among thorns; and hard to be reached as the heart of proud maiden.
Though once attained, all three—red rose, bright shore, and soft
heart—are full of love, bloom, and all manner of delights. The Pearl
Shell islands excepted.

Besides, in those generally tranquil waters, Samoa’s little craft,
though hundreds of miles from land, was very readily managed by himself
and Annatoo. So small was the Parki, that one hand could brace the
main-yard; and a very easy thing it was, even to hoist the small
top-sails; for after their first clumsy attempt to perform that
operation by hand, they invariably led the halyards to the windlass,
and so managed it, with the utmost facility.




CHAPTER XXVI.
Containing A Pennyweight Of Philosophy


Still many days passed and the Parki yet floated. The little flying-
fish got used to her familiar, loitering hull; and like swallows
building their nests in quiet old trees, they spawned in the great
green barnacles that clung to her sides.

The calmer the sea, the more the barnacles grow. In the tropical
Pacific, but a few weeks suffice thus to encase your craft in shell
armor. Vast bunches adhere to the very cutwater, and if not stricken
off, much impede the ship’s sailing. And, at intervals, this clearing
away of barnacles was one of Annatoo’s occupations. For be it known,
that, like most termagants, the dame was tidy at times, though
capriciously; loving cleanliness by fits and starts. Wherefore, these
barnacles oftentimes troubled her; and with a long pole she would go
about, brushing them aside. It beguiled the weary hours, if nothing
more; and then she would return to her beads and her trinkets; telling
them all over again; murmuring forth her devotions, and marking whether
Samoa had been pilfering from her store.

Now, the escape from the shoal did much once again to heal the
differences of the good lady and her spouse. And keeping house, as they
did, all alone by themselves, in that lonely craft, a marvel it is,
that they should ever have quarreled. And then to divorce, and yet
dwell in the same tenement, was only aggravating the evil. So
Belisarius and Antonina again came together. But now, grown wise by
experience, they neither loved over-keenly, nor hated; but took things
as they were; found themselves joined, without hope of a sundering, and
did what they could to make a match of the mate. Annatoo concluded that
Samoa was not wholly to be enslaved; and Samoa thought best to wink at
Annatoo’s foibles, and let her purloin when she pleased.

But as in many cases, all this philosophy about wedlock is not proof
against the perpetual contact of the parties concerned; and as it is
far better to revive the old days of courtship, when men’s mouths are
honey-combs: and, to make them still sweeter, the ladies the bees which
there store their sweets; when fathomless raptures glimmer far down in
the lover’s fond eye; and best of all, when visits are alternated by
absence: so, like my dignified lord duke and his duchess, Samoa and
Annatoo, man and wife, dwelling in the same house, still kept up their
separate quarters. Marlborough visiting Sarah; and Sarah, Marlborough,
whenever the humor suggested.




CHAPTER XXVII.
In Which The Past History Of The Parki Is Concluded


Still days, days, days sped by; and steering now this way, now that, to
avoid the green treacherous shores, which frequently rose into view,
the Parki went to and fro in the sea; till at last, it seemed hard to
tell, in what watery world she floated. Well knowing the risks they
ran, Samoa desponded. But blessed be ignorance. For in the day of his
despondency, the lively old lass his wife bade him be of stout heart,
cheer up, and steer away manfully for the setting sun; following which,
they must inevitably arrive at her own dear native island, where all
their cares would be over. So squaring their yards, away they glided;
far sloping down the liquid sphere.

Upon the afternoon of the day we caught sight of them in our boat, they
had sighted a cluster of low islands, which put them in no small panic,
because of their resemblance to those where the massacre had taken
place. Whereas, they must have been full five hundred leagues from that
fearful vicinity. However, they altered their course to avoid it; and a
little before sunset, dropping the islands astern, resumed their
previous track. But very soon after, they espied our little sea-goat,
bounding over the billows from afar.

This they took for a canoe giving chase to them. It renewed and
augmented their alarm.

And when at last they perceived that the strange object was a boat,
their fears, instead of being allayed, only so much the more increased.
For their wild superstitions led them to conclude, that a white man’s
craft coming upon them so suddenly, upon the open sea, and by night,
could be naught but a phantom. Furthermore, marking two of us in the
Chamois, they fancied us the ghosts of the Cholos. A conceit which
effectually damped Samoa’s courage, like my Viking’s, only proof
against things tangible. So seeing us bent upon boarding the
brigantine; after a hurried over-turning of their chattels, with a view
of carrying the most valuable aloft for safe keeping, they secreted
what they could; and together made for the fore-top; the man with a
musket, the woman with a bag of beads. Their endeavoring to secure
these treasures against ghostly appropriation originated in no real
fear, that otherwise they would be stolen: it was simply incidental to
the vacant panic into which they were thrown. No reproach this, to
Belisarius’ heart of game; for the most intrepid Feegee warrior, he who
has slain his hecatombs, will not go ten yards in the dark alone, for
fear of ghosts.

Their purpose was to remain in the top until daylight; by which time,
they counted upon the withdrawal of their visitants; who, sure enough,
at last sprang on board, thus verifying their worst apprehensions.

They watched us long and earnestly. But curious to tell, in that very
strait of theirs, perched together in that airy top, their domestic
differences again broke forth; most probably, from their being suddenly
forced into such very close contact.

However that might be, taking advantage of our descent into the cabin,
Samoa, in desperation fled from his wife, and one-armed as he was,
sailor-like, shifted himself over by the fore and aft-stays to the
main-top, his musket being slung to his back. And thus divided, though
but a few yards intervened, the pair were as much asunder as if at the
opposite Poles.

During the live-long night they were both in great perplexity as to the
extraordinary goblins on board. Such inquisitive, meddlesome spirits,
had never before been encountered. So cool and systematic; sagaciously
stopping the vessel’s headway the better to rummage;—the very plan they
themselves had adopted. But what most surprised them, was our striking
a light, a thing of which no true ghost would be guilty. Then, our
eating and drinking on the quarter- deck including the deliberate
investment of Vienna; and many other actions equally strange, almost
led Samoa to fancy that we were no shades, after all, but a couple of
men from the moon.

Yet they had dimly caught sight of the frocks and trowsers we wore,
similar to those which the captain of the Parki had bestowed upon the
two Cholos, and in which those villains had been killed. This, with the
presence of the whale boat, united to chase away the conceit of our
lunar origin. But these considerations renewed their first
superstitious impressions of our being the ghosts of the murderous
half-breeds.

Nevertheless, while during the latter part of the night we were
reclining beneath him, munching our biscuit, Samoa eyeing us intently,
was half a mind to open fire upon us by way of testing our
corporeality. But most luckily, he concluded to defer so doing till
sunlight; if by that time we should not have evaporated.

For dame Annatoo, almost from our first boarding the brigantine,
something in our manner had bred in her a lurking doubt as to the
genuineness of our atmospheric organization; and abandoned to her
speculations when Samoa fled from her side, her incredulity waxed
stronger and stronger. Whence we came she knew not; enough, that we
seemed bent upon pillaging her own precious purloinings. Alas! thought
she, my buttons, my nails, my tappa, my dollars, my beads, and my
boxes!

Wrought up to desperation by these dismal forebodings, she at length
shook the ropes leading from her own perch to Samoa’s; adopting this
method of arousing his attention to the heinousness of what was in all
probability going on in the cabin, a prelude most probably to the
invasion of her own end of the vessel. Had she dared raise her voice,
no doubt she would have suggested the expediency of shooting us so soon
as we emerged from the cabin. But failing to shake Samoa into an
understanding of her views on the subject, her malice proved futile.

When her worst fears were confirmed, however, and we actually descended
into the forecastle; there ensued such a reckless shaking of the ropes,
that Samoa was fain to hold on hard, for fear of being tossed out of
the rigging. And it was this violent rocking that caused the loud
creaking of the yards, so often heard by us while below in Annatoo’s
apartment.

And the fore-top being just over the open forecastle scuttle, the dame
could look right down upon us; hence our proceedings were plainly
revealed by the lights that we carried. Upon our breaking open her
strong-box, her indignation almost completely overmastered her fears.
Unhooking a top-block, down it came into the forecastle, charitably
commissioned with the demolition of Jarl’s cocoa-nut, then more exposed
to the view of an aerial observer than my own. But of it turned out, no
harm was done to our porcelain.

At last, morning dawned; when ensued Jarl’s discovery as the occupant
of the main-top; which event, with what followed, has been duly
recounted.

And such, in substance, was the first, second, third and fourth acts of
the Parki drama. The fifth and last, including several scenes, now
follows.




CHAPTER XXVIII.
Suspicions Laid, And Something About The Calmuc


Though abounding in details full of the savor of reality, Samoa’s
narrative did not at first appear altogether satisfactory. Not that it
was so strange; for stranger recitals I had heard.

But one reason, perhaps, was that I had anticipated a narrative quite
different; something agreeing with my previous surmises.

Not a little puzzling, also, was his account of having seen islands the
day preceding; though, upon reflection, that might have been the case,
and yet, from his immediately altering the Parki’s course, the Chamois,
unknowingly might have sailed by their vicinity. Still, those islands
could form no part of the chain we were seeking. They must have been
some region hitherto undiscovered.

But seems it likely, thought I, that one, who, according to his own
account, has conducted himself so heroically in rescuing the
brigantine, should be the victim of such childish terror at the mere
glimpse of a couple of sailors in an open boat, so well supplied, too,
with arms, as he was, to resist their capturing his craft, if such
proved their intention? On the contrary, would it not have been more
natural, in his dreary situation, to have hailed our approach with the
utmost delight? But then again, we were taken for phantoms, not flesh
and blood. Upon the whole, I regarded the narrator of these things
somewhat distrustfully. But he met my gaze like a man. While Annatoo,
standing by, looked so expressively the Amazonian character imputed to
her, that my doubts began to waver. And recalling all the little
incidents of their story, so hard to be conjured up on the spur of a
presumed necessity to lie; nay, so hard to be conjured up at all; my
suspicions at last gave way. And I could no longer harbor any
misgivings.

For, to be downright, what object could Samoa have, in fabricating such
a narrative of horrors—those of the massacre, I mean—unless to conceal
some tragedy, still more atrocious, in which he himself had been
criminally concerned? A supposition, which, for obvious reasons, seemed
out of the question. True, instances were known to me of half-
civilized beings, like Samoa, forming part of the crews of ships in
these seas, rising suddenly upon their white ship-mates, and murdering
them, for the sake of wrecking the ship on the shore of some island
near by, and plundering her hull, when stranded.

But had this been purposed with regard to the Parki, where the rest of
the mutineers? There was no end to my conjectures; the more I indulged
in them, the more they multiplied. So, unwilling to torment myself,
when nothing could be learned, but what Samoa related, and stuck to
like a hero; I gave over conjecturing at all; striving hard to repose
full faith in the Islander.

Jarl, however, was skeptical to the last; and never could be brought
completely to credit the tale. He stoutly maintained that the
hobgoblins must have had something or other to do with the Parki.

My own curiosity satisfied with respect to the brigantine, Samoa
himself turned inquisitor. He desired to know who we were; and whence
we came in our marvelous boat. But on these heads I thought best to
withhold from him the truth; among other things, fancying that if
disclosed, it would lessen his deference for us, as men superior to
himself. I therefore spoke vaguely of our adventures, and assumed the
decided air of a master; which I perceived was not lost upon the rude
Islander. As for Jarl, and what he might reveal, I embraced the first
opportunity to impress upon him the importance of never divulging our
flight from the Arcturion; nor in any way to commit himself on that
head: injunctions which he faithfully promised to observe.

If not wholly displeased with the fine form of Samoa, despite his
savage lineaments, and mutilated member, I was much less conciliated by
the person of Annatoo; who, being sinewy of limb, and neither young,
comely, nor amiable, was exceedingly distasteful in my eyes. Besides,
she was a tigress. Yet how avoid admiring those Penthesilian qualities
which so signally had aided Samoa, in wresting the Parki from its
treacherous captors. Nevertheless, it was indispensable that she should
at once be brought under prudent subjection; and made to know, once for
all, that though conjugally a rebel, she must be nautically submissive.
For to keep the sea with a Calmuc on board, seemed next to impossible.
In most military marines, they are prohibited by law; no officer may
take his Pandora and her bandbox off soundings.

By the way, this self-same appellative, Pandora, has been bestowed upon
vessels. There was a British ship by that name, dispatched in quest of
the mutineers of the Bounty. But any old tar might have prophesied her
fate. Bound home she was wrecked on a reef off New South Wales.
Pandora, indeed! A pretty name for a ship: fairly smiting Fate in the
face. But in this matter of christening ships of war, Christian nations
are but too apt to be dare-devils. Witness the following: British names
all—The Conqueror, the Defiance, the Revenge, the Spitfire, the
Dreadnaught, the Thunderer, and the Tremendous; not omitting the Etna,
which, in the Roads of Corfu, was struck by lightning, coming nigh
being consumed by fire from above. But almost potent as Moses’ rod,
Franklin’s proved her salvation.

With the above catalogue, compare we the Frenchman’s; quite
characteristic of the aspirations of Monsieur:—The Destiny, the
Glorious, the Magnanimous, the Magnificent, the Conqueror, the
Triumphant, the Indomitable, the Intrepid, the Mont-Blanc. Lastly, the
Dons; who have ransacked the theology of the religion of peace for fine
names for their fighting ships; stopping not at designating one of
their three-deckers, The Most Holy Trinity. But though, at Trafalgar,
the Santissima Trinidada thundered like Sinai, her thunders were
silenced by the victorious cannonade of the Victory.

And without being blown into splinters by artillery, how many of these
Redoubtables and Invincibles have succumbed to the waves, and like
braggarts gone down before hurricanes, with their bravadoes broad on
their bows.

Much better the American names (barring Scorpions, Hornets, and Wasps;)
Ohio, Virginia, Carolina, Vermont. And if ever these Yankees fight
great sea engagements—which Heaven forefend!—how glorious, poetically
speaking, to range up the whole federated fleet, and pour forth a
broadside from Florida to Maine. Ay, ay, very glorious indeed! yet in
that proud crowing of cannon, how shall the shade of peace-loving Penn
be astounded, to see the mightiest murderer of them all, the great
Pennsylvania, a very namesake of his. Truly, the Pennsylvania’s guns
should be the wooden ones, called by men-of- war’s-men, Quakers.

But all this is an episode, made up of digressions. Time to tack ship,
and return.

Now, in its proper place, I omitted to mention, that shortly after
descending from the rigging, and while Samoa was rehearsing his
adventures, dame Annatoo had stolen below into the forecastle, intent
upon her chattels. And finding them all in mighty disarray, she
returned to the deck prodigiously, excited, and glancing angrily toward
Jarl and me, showered a whole torrent of objurgations into both ears of
Samoa.

This contempt of my presence surprised me at first; but perhaps women
are less apt to be impressed by a pretentious demeanor, than men.

Now, to use a fighting phrase, there is nothing like boarding an enemy
in the smoke. And therefore, upon this first token of Annatoo’s
termagant qualities, I gave her to understand—craving her pardon—that
neither the vessel nor aught therein was hers; but that every thing
belonged to the owners in Lahina. I added, that at all hazards, a stop
must be put to her pilferings. Rude language for feminine ears; but how
to be avoided? Here was an infatuated woman, who, according to Samoa’s
account, had been repeatedly detected in the act of essaying to draw
out the screw-bolts which held together the planks. Tell me; was she
not worse than the Load-Stone Rock, sailing by which a stout ship fell
to pieces?

During this scene, Samoa said little. Perhaps he was secretly pleased
that his matrimonial authority was reinforced by myself and my Viking,
whose views of the proper position of wives at sea, so fully
corresponded with his own; however difficult to practice, those purely
theoretical ideas of his had hitherto proved.

Once more turning to Annatoo, now looking any thing but amiable, I
observed, that all her clamors would be useless; and that if it came to
the worst, the Parki had a hull that would hold her.

In the end she went off in a fit of the sulks; sitting down on the
windlass and glaring; her arms akimbo, and swaying from side to side;
while ever and anon she gave utterance to a dismal chant. It sounded
like an invocation to the Cholos to rise and dispatch us.




CHAPTER XXIX.
What They Lighted Upon In Further Searching The Craft, And The
Resolution They Came To


Descending into the cabin with Samoa, I bade him hunt up the
brigantine’s log, the captain’s writing-desk, and nautical instruments;
in a word, aught that could throw light on the previous history of the
craft, or aid in navigating her homeward.

But nearly every thing of the kind had disappeared: log, quadrant, and
ship’s papers. Nothing was left but the sextant-case, which Jarl and I
had lighted upon in the state-room.

Upon this, vague though they were, my suspicions returned; and I
closely questioned the Islander concerning the disappearance of these
important articles. In reply, he gave me to understand, that the
nautical instruments had been clandestinely carried down into the
forecastle by Annatoo; and by that indefatigable and inquisitive dame
they had been summarily taken apart for scientific inspection. It was
impossible to restore them; for many of the fixtures were lost,
including the colored glasses, sights, and little mirrors; and many
parts still recoverable, were so battered and broken as to be entirely
useless. For several days afterward, we now and then came across bits
of the quadrant or sextant; but it was only to mourn over their fate.

However, though sextant and quadrant were both unattainable, I did not
so quickly renounce all hope of discovering a chronometer, which, if in
good order, though at present not ticking, might still be made in some
degree serviceable. But no such instrument was to be seen. No: nor to
be heard of; Samoa himself professing utter ignorance.

Annatoo, I threatened and coaxed; describing the chronometer—a live,
round creature like a toad, that made a strange noise, which I
imitated; but she knew nothing about it. Whether she had lighted upon
it unbeknown to Samoa, and dissected it as usual, there was now no way
to determine. Indeed, upon this one point, she maintained an air of
such inflexible stupidity, that if she were really fibbing, her
dead-wall countenance superseded the necessity for verbal deceit.

It may be, however, that in this particular she was wronged; for, as
with many small vessels, the Parki might never have possessed the
instrument in question. All thought, therefore, of feeling our way, as
we should penetrate farther and farther into the watery wilderness, was
necessarily abandoned.

The log book had also formed a portion of Annatoo’s pilferings. It
seems she had taken it into her studio to ponder over. But after
amusing herself by again and again counting over the leaves, and
wondering how so many distinct surfaces could be compacted together in
so small a compass, she had very suddenly conceived an aversion to
literature, and dropped the book overboard as worthless. Doubtless, it
met the fate of many other ponderous tomes; sinking quickly and
profoundly. What Camden or Stowe hereafter will dive for it?

One evening Samoa brought me a quarto half-sheet of yellowish, ribbed
paper, much soiled and tarry, which he had discovered in a dark hole of
the forecastle. It had plainly formed part of the lost log; but all the
writing thereon, at present decipherable, conveyed no information upon
the subject then nearest my heart.

But one could not but be struck by a tragical occurrence, which the
page very briefly recounted; as well, as by a noteworthy pictorial
illustration of the event in the margin of the text. Save the cut,
there was no further allusion to the matter than the following:— “This
day, being calm, Tooboi, one of the Lahina men, went overboard for a
bath, and was eaten up by a shark. Immediately sent forward for his
bag.”

Now, this last sentence was susceptible of two meanings. It is truth,
that immediately upon the decease of a friendless sailor at sea, his
shipmates oftentimes seize upon his effects, and divide them; though
the dead man’s clothes are seldom worn till a subsequent voyage. This
proceeding seems heartless. But sailors reason thus: Better we, than
the captain. For by law, either scribbled or unscribbled, the effects
of a mariner, dying on shipboard, should be held in trust by that
officer. But as sailors are mostly foundlings and castaways, and carry
all their kith and kin in their arms and their legs, there hardly ever
appears any heir-at-law to claim their estate; seldom worth inheriting,
like Esterhazy’s. Wherefore, the withdrawal of a dead man’s “kit” from
the forecastle to the cabin, is often held tantamount to its virtual
appropriation by the captain. At any rate, in small ships on long
voyages, such things have been done.

Thus much being said, then, the sentence above quoted from the Parki’s
log, may be deemed somewhat ambiguous. At the time it struck me as
singular; for the poor diver’s grass bag could not have contained much
of any thing valuable unless, peradventure, he had concealed therein
some Cleopatra pearls, feloniously abstracted from the shells brought
up from the sea.

Aside of the paragraph, copied above, was a pen-and-ink sketch of the
casualty, most cruelly executed; the poor fellow’s legs being
represented half way in the process of deglutition; his arms firmly
grasping the monster’s teeth, as if heroically bent upon making as
tough a morsel of himself as possible.

But no doubt the honest captain sketched this cenotaph to the departed
in all sincerity of heart; perhaps, during the melancholy leisure which
followed the catastrophe. Half obliterated were several stains upon the
page; seemingly, lingering traces of a salt tear or two.

From this unwonted embellishment of the text, I was led to infer, that
the designer, at one time or other, must have been engaged in the
vocation of whaling. For, in India ink, the logs of certain whalemen
are decorated by somewhat similar illustrations.

When whales are seen, but not captured, the fact is denoted by an
outline figure representing the creature’s flukes, the broad, curving
lobes of his tail. But in those cases where the monster is both chased
and killed, this outline is filled up jet black; one for every whale
slain; presenting striking objects in turning over the log; and so
facilitating reference. Hence, it is quite imposing to behold, all in a
row, three or four, sometime five or six, of these drawings; showing
that so many monsters that day jetted their last spout. And the chief
mate, whose duty it is to keep the ship’s record, generally prides
himself upon the beauty, and flushy likeness to life, of his flukes;
though, sooth to say, many of these artists are no Landseers.

After vainly searching the cabin for those articles we most needed, we
proceeded to explore the hold, into which as yet we had not penetrated.
Here, we found a considerable quantity of pearl shells; cocoanuts; an
abundance of fresh water in casks; spare sails and rigging; and some
fifty barrels or more of salt beef and biscuit. Unromantic as these
last mentioned objects were, I lingered over them long, and in a
revery. Branded upon each barrel head was the name of a place in
America, with which I was very familiar. It is from America chiefly,
that ship’s stores are originally procured for the few vessels sailing
out of the Hawaiian Islands.

Having now acquainted myself with all things respecting the Parki,
which could in any way be learned, I repaired to the quarter-deck, and
summoning round me Samoa, Annatoo, and Jarl, gravely addressed them.

I said, that nothing would give me greater satisfaction than forthwith
to return to the scene of the massacre, and chastise its surviving
authors. But as there were only four of us in all; and the place of
those islands was wholly unknown to me; and even if known, would be
altogether out of our reach, since we possessed no instruments of
navigation; it was quite plain that all thought of returning thither
was entirely useless. The last mentioned reason, also, prevented our
voyaging to the Hawaiian group, where the vessel belonged; though that
would have been the most advisable step, resulting, as it would, if
successful, in restoring the ill-fated craft to her owners.

But all things considered, it seemed best, I added, cautiously to hold
on our way to the westward. It was our easiest course; for we would
ever have the wind from astern; and though we could not so much as hope
to arrive at any one spot previously designated, there was still a
positive certainty, if we floated long enough, of falling in with
islands whereat to refresh ourselves; and whence, if we thought fit, we
might afterward embark for more agreeable climes. I then reminded them
of the fact, that so long as we kept the sea, there was always some
prospect of encountering a friendly sail; in which event, our
solicitude would be over.

All this I said in the mild, firm tone of a superior; being anxious, at
once to assume the unquestioned supremacy. For, otherwise, Jarl and I
might better quit the vessel forthwith, than remain on board subject to
the outlandish caprices of Annatoo, who through Samoa would then have
the sway. But I was sure of my Viking; and if Samoa proved docile, had
no fear of his dame.

And therefore during my address, I steadfastly eyed him; thereby
learning enough to persuade me, that though he deferred to me at
present, he was, notwithstanding, a man who, without precisely
meditating mischief, could upon occasion act an ugly part. But of his
courage, and savage honor, such as it was, I had little doubt. Then,
wild buffalo that he was, tamed down in the yoke matrimonial, I could
not but fancy, that if upon no other account, our society must please
him, as rendering less afflictive the tyranny of his spouse.

For a hen-pecked husband, by the way, Samoa was a most terrible fellow
to behold. And though, after all, I liked him; it was as you fancy a
fiery steed with mane disheveled, as young Alexander fancied
Bucephalus; which wild horse, when he patted, he preferred holding by
the bridle. But more of Samoa anon.

Our course determined, and the command of the vessel tacitly yielded up
to myself, the next thing done was to put every thing in order. The
tattered sails were replaced by others, dragged up from the sail- room
below; in several places, new running-rigging was rove; blocks
restrapped; and the slackened stays and shrouds set taught. For all of
which, we were mostly indebted to my Viking’s unwearied and skillful
marling-spike, which he swayed like a scepter.

The little Parki’s toilet being thus thoroughly made for the first time
since the massacre, we gave her new raiment to the breeze, and daintily
squaring her yards, she gracefully glided away; honest old Jarl at the
helm, watchfully guiding her path, like some devoted old foster-father.

As I stood by his side like a captain, or walked up and down on the
quarter-deck, I felt no little importance upon thus assuming for the
first time in my life, the command of a vessel at sea. The novel
circumstances of the case only augmented this feeling; the wild and
remote seas where we were; the character of my crew, and the
consideration, that to all purposes, I was owner, as well as commander
of the craft I sailed.




CHAPTER XXX.
Hints For A Full Length Of Samoa


My original intention to touch at the Kingsmill Chain, or the countries
adjacent, was greatly strengthened by thus encountering Samoa; and the
more I had to do with my Belisarius, the more I was pleased with him.
Nor could I avoid congratulating myself, upon having fallen in with a
hero, who in various ways, could not fail of proving exceedingly
useful.

Like any man of mark, Samoa best speaks for himself; but we may as well
convey some idea of his person. Though manly enough, nay, an obelisk in
stature, the savage was far from being sentimentally prepossessing. Be
not alarmed; but he wore his knife in the lobe of his dexter ear,
which, by constant elongation almost drooped upon his shoulder. A mode
of sheathing it exceedingly handy, and far less brigandish than the
Highlander’s dagger concealed in his leggins.

But it was the mother of Samoa, who at a still earlier day had
punctured him through and through in still another direction. The
middle cartilage of his nose was slightly pendent, peaked, and Gothic,
and perforated with a hole; in which, like a Newfoundland dog carrying
a cane, Samoa sported a trinket: a well polished nail.

In other respects he was equally a coxcomb. In his style of tattooing,
for instance, which seemed rather incomplete; his marks embracing but a
vertical half of his person, from crown to sole; the other side being
free from the slightest stain. Thus clapped together, as it were, he
looked like a union of the unmatched moieties of two distinct beings;
and your fancy was lost in conjecturing, where roamed the absent ones.
When he turned round upon you suddenly, you thought you saw some one
else, not him whom you had been regarding before.

But there was one feature in Samoa beyond the reach of the innovations
of art:—his eye; which in civilized man or savage, ever shines in the
head, just as it shone at birth. Truly, our eyes are miraculous things.
But alas, that in so many instances, these divine organs should be mere
lenses inserted into the socket, as glasses in spectacle rims.

But my Islander had a soul in his eye; looking out upon you there, like
somebody in him. What an eye, to be sure! At times, brilliantly
changeful as opal; in anger, glowing like steel at white heat.

Belisarius, be it remembered, had but very recently lost an arm. But
you would have thought he had been born without it; so Lord Nelson-
like and cavalierly did he sport the honorable stump.

But no more of Samoa; only this: that his name had been given him by a
sea-captain; to whom it had been suggested by the native designation of
the islands to which he belonged; the Saviian or Samoan group,
otherwise known as the Navigator Islands. The island of Upolua, one of
that cluster, claiming the special honor of his birth, as Corsica does
Napoleon’s, we shall occasionally hereafter speak of Samoa as the
Upoluan; by which title he most loved to be called.

It is ever ungallant to pass over a lady. But what shall be said of
Annatoo? As I live, I can make no pleasing portrait of the dame; for as
in most ugly subjects, flattering would but make the matter worse.
Furthermore, unalleviated ugliness should ever go unpainted, as
something unnecessary to duplicate. But the only ugliness is that of
the heart, seen through the face. And though beauty be obvious, the
only loveliness is invisible.




CHAPTER XXXI.
Rovings Alow And Aloft


Every one knows what a fascination there is in wandering up and down in
a deserted old tenement in some warm, dreamy country; where the vacant
halls seem echoing of silence, and the doors creak open like the
footsteps of strangers; and into every window the old garden trees
thrust their dark boughs, like the arms of night-burglars; and ever and
anon the nails start from the wainscot; while behind it the mice rattle
like dice. Up and down in such old specter houses one loves to wander;
and so much the more, if the place be haunted by some marvelous story.

And during the drowsy stillness of the tropical sea-day, very much such
a fancy had I, for prying about our little brigantine, whose tragic
hull was haunted by the memory of the massacre, of which it still bore
innumerable traces.

And so far as the indulgence of quiet strolling and reverie was
concerned, it was well nigh the same as if I were all by myself. For
Samoa, for a time, was rather reserved, being occupied with thoughts of
his own. And Annatoo seldom troubled me with her presence. She was
taken up with her calicoes and jewelry; which I had permitted her to
retain, to keep her in good humor if possible. And as for My royal old
Viking, he was one of those individuals who seldom speak, unless
personally addressed.

Besides, all that by day was necessary to navigating the Parki was,
that—somebody should stand at the helm; the craft being so small, and
the grating, whereon the steersman stood, so elevated, that he
commanded a view far beyond the bowsprit; thus keeping Argus eyes on
the sea, as he steered us along. In all other respects we left the
brigantine to the guardianship of the gentle winds.

My own turn at the helm—for though commander, I felt constrained to do
duty with the rest—came but once in the twenty-four hours. And not only
did Jarl and Samoa, officiate as helmsmen, but also Dame Annatoo, who
had become quite expert at the business. Though Jarl always maintained
that there was a slight drawback upon her usefulness in this vocation.
Too much taken up by her lovely image partially reflected in the glass
of the binnacle before her, Annatoo now and then neglected her duty,
and led us some devious dances. Nor was she, I ween, the first woman
that ever led men into zigzags.

For the reasons above stated, I had many spare hours to myself. At
times, I mounted aloft, and lounging in the slings of the topsail
yard—one of the many snug nooks in a ship’s rigging—I gazed broad off
upon the blue boundless sea, and wondered what they were doing in that
unknown land, toward which we were fated to be borne. Or feeling less
meditative, I roved about hither and thither; slipping over, by the
stays, from one mast to the other; climbing up to the truck; or
lounging out to the ends of the yards; exploring wherever there was a
foothold. It was like climbing about in some mighty old oak, and
resting in the crotches.

To a sailor, a ship’s ropes are a study. And to me, every rope-yarn of
the Parki’s was invested with interest. The outlandish fashion of her
shrouds, the collars of her stays, the stirrups, seizings,
Flemish-horses, gaskets,—all the wilderness of her rigging, bore
unequivocal traces of her origin.

But, perhaps, my pleasantest hours were those which I spent, stretched
out on a pile of old sails, in the fore-top; lazily dozing to the
craft’s light roll.

Frequently, I descended to the cabin: for the fiftieth time, exploring
the lockers and state-rooms for some new object of curiosity. And
often, with a glimmering light, I went into the midnight hold, as into
old vaults and catacombs; and creeping between damp ranges of casks,
penetrated into its farthest recesses.

Sometimes, in these under-ground burrowings, I lighted upon sundry
out-of-the-way hiding places of Annatoo’s; where were snugly secreted
divers articles, with which she had been smitten. In truth, no small
portion of the hull seemed a mine of stolen goods, stolen out of its
own bowels. I found a jaunty shore-cap of the captain’s, hidden away in
the hollow heart of a coil of rigging; covered over in a manner most
touchingly natural, with a heap of old ropes; and near by, in a
breaker, discovered several entire pieces of calico, heroically tied
together with cords almost strong enough to sustain the mainmast.

Near the stray light, which, when the hatch was removed, gleamed down
into this part of the hold, was a huge ground-tier butt, headless as
Charles the First. And herein was a mat nicely spread for repose; a
discovery which accounted for what had often proved an enigma. Not
seldom Annatoo had been among the missing; and though, from stem to
stern, loudly invoked to come forth and relieve the poignant distress
of her anxious friends, the dame remained perdu; silent and invisible
as a spirit. But in her own good time, she would mysteriously emerge;
or be suddenly espied lounging quietly in the forecastle, as if she had
been there from all eternity.

Useless to inquire, “Where hast thou been, sweet Annatoo?” For no sweet
rejoinder would she give.

But now the problem was solved. Here, in this silent cask in the hold,
Annatoo was wont to coil herself away, like a garter-snake under a
stone.

Whether-she-thus stood sentry over her goods secreted round about:
whether she here performed penance like a nun in her cell; or was moved
to this unaccountable freak by the powers of the air; no one could
tell. Can you?

Verily, her ways were as the ways of the inscrutable penguins in
building their inscrutable nests, which baffle all science, and make a
fool of a sage.

Marvelous Annatoo! who shall expound thee?




CHAPTER XXXII.
Xiphius Platypterus


About this time, the loneliness of our voyage was relieved by an event
worth relating.

Ever since leaving the Pearl Shell Islands, the Parki had been followed
by shoals of small fish, pleasantly enlivening the sea, and socially
swimming by her side. But in vain did Jarl and I search among their
ranks for the little, steel-blue Pilot fish, so long outriders of the
Chamois. But perhaps since the Chamois was now high and dry on the
Parki’s deck, our bright little avant-couriers were lurking out of
sight, far down in the brine; racing along close to the keel.

But it is not with the Pilot fish that we now have to do.

One morning our attention was attracted to a mighty commotion in the
water. The shoals of fish were darting hither and thither, and leaping
into the air in the utmost affright. Samoa declared, that their deadly
foe the Sword fish must be after them.

And here let me say, that, since of all the bullies, and braggarts, and
bravoes, and free-booters, and Hectors, and fish-at-arms, and
knight-errants, and moss-troopers, and assassins, and foot-pads, and
gallant soldiers, and immortal heroes that swim the seas, the Indian
Sword fish is by far the most remarkable, I propose to dedicate this
chapter to a special description of the warrior. In doing which, I but
follow the example of all chroniclers and historians, my Peloponnesian
friend Thucydides and others, who are ever mindful of devoting much
space to accounts of eminent destroyers; for the purpose, no doubt, of
holding them up as ensamples to the world.

Now, the fish here treated of is a very different creature from the
Sword fish frequenting the Northern Atlantic; being much larger every
way, and a more dashing varlet to boot. Furthermore, he is denominated
the Indian Sword fish, in contradistinction from his namesake above
mentioned. But by seamen in the Pacific, he is more commonly known as
the Bill fish; while for those who love science and hard names, be it
known, that among the erudite naturalists he goeth by the outlandish
appellation of “_Xiphius Platypterus_.”

But I waive for my hero all these his cognomens, and substitute a much
better one of my own: namely, the Chevalier. And a Chevalier he is, by
good right and title. A true gentleman of Black Prince Edward’s bright
day, when all gentlemen were known by their swords; whereas, in times
present, the Sword fish excepted, they are mostly known by their high
polished boots and rattans.

A right valiant and jaunty Chevalier is our hero; going about with his
long Toledo perpetually drawn. Rely upon it, he will fight you to the
hilt, for his bony blade has never a scabbard. He himself sprang from
it at birth; yea, at the very moment he leaped into the Battle of Life;
as we mortals ourselves spring all naked and scabbardless into the
world. Yet, rather, are we scabbards to our souls. And the drawn soul
of genius is more glittering than the drawn cimeter of Saladin. But how
many let their steel sleep, till it eat up the scabbard itself, and
both corrode to rust-chips. Saw you ever the hillocks of old Spanish
anchors, and anchor-stocks of ancient galleons, at the bottom of Callao
Bay? The world is full of old Tower armories, and dilapidated Venetian
arsenals, and rusty old rapiers. But true warriors polish their good
blades by the bright beams of the morning; and gird them on to their
brave sirloins; and watch for rust spots as for foes; and by many stout
thrusts and stoccadoes keep their metal lustrous and keen, as the
spears of the Northern Lights charging over Greenland.

Fire from the flint is our Chevalier enraged. He takes umbrage at the
cut of some ship’s keel crossing his road; and straightway runs a tilt
at it; with one mad lounge thrusting his Andrea Ferrara clean through
and through; not seldom breaking it short off at the haft, like a bravo
leaving his poignard in the vitals of his foe.

In the case of the English ship Foxhound, the blade penetrated through
the most solid part of her hull, the bow; going completely through the
copper plates and timbers, and showing for several inches in the hold.
On the return of the ship to London, it was carefully sawn out; and,
imbedded in the original wood, like a fossil, is still preserved. But
this was a comparatively harmless onslaught of the valiant Chevalier.
With the Rousseau, of Nantucket, it fared worse. She was almost
mortally stabbed; her assailant withdrawing his blade. And it was only
by keeping the pumps clanging, that she managed to swim into a Tahitian
harbor, “heave down,” and have her wound dressed by a ship-surgeon with
tar and oakum. This ship I met with at sea, shortly after the disaster.

At what armory our Chevalier equips himself after one of his spiteful
tilting-matches, it would not be easy to say. But very hard for him, if
ever after he goes about in the lists, swordless and disarmed, at the
mercy of any caitiff shark he may meet.

Now, seeing that our fellow-voyagers, the little fish along-side, were
sorely tormented and thinned out by the incursions of a pertinacious
Chevalier, bent upon making a hearty breakfast out of them, I
determined to interfere in their behalf, and capture the enemy.

With shark-hook and line I succeeded, and brought my brave gentleman to
the deck. He made an emphatic landing; lashing the planks with his
sinewy tail; while a yard and a half in advance of his eyes, reached
forth his terrible blade.

As victor, I was entitled to the arms of the vanquished; so, quickly
dispatching him, and sawing off his Toledo, I bore it away for a
trophy. It was three-sided, slightly concave on each, like a bayonet;
and some three inches through at the base, it tapered from thence to a
point.

And though tempered not in Tagus or Guadalquiver, it yet revealed upon
its surface that wavy grain and watery fleckiness peculiar to tried
blades of Spain. It was an aromatic sword; like the ancient caliph’s,
giving out a peculiar musky odor by friction. But far different from
steel of Tagus or Damascus, it was inflexible as Crocket’s rifle tube;
no doubt, as deadly.

Long hung that rapier over the head of my hammock. Was it not storied
as the good trenchant blade of brave Bayard, that other chevalier? The
knight’s may have slain its scores, or fifties; but the weapon I
preserved had, doubtless, run through and riddled its thousands.




CHAPTER XXXIII.
Otard


And here is another little incident.

One afternoon while all by myself curiously penetrating into the hold,
I most unexpectedly obtained proof, that the ill-fated captain of the
Parki had been a man of sound judgment and most excellent taste. In
brief, I lighted upon an aromatic cask of prime old Otard.

Now, I mean not to speak lightly of any thing immediately connected
with the unfortunate captain. Nor, on the other hand, would I resemble
the inconsolable mourner, who among other tokens of affliction, bound
in funereal crape his deceased friend’s copy of Joe Miller. Is there
not a fitness in things?

But let that pass. I found the Otard, and drank there-of; finding it,
moreover, most pleasant to the palate, and right cheering to the soul.
My next impulse was to share my prize with my shipmates. But here a
judicious reflection obtruded. From the sea-monarchs, his ancestors, my
Viking had inherited one of their cardinal virtues, a detestation and
abhorrence of all vinous and spirituous beverages; insomuch, that he
never could see any, but he instantly quaffed it out of sight. To be
short, like Alexander the Great and other royalties, Jarl was prone to
overmuch bibing. And though at sea more sober than a Fifth Monarchy
Elder, it was only because he was then removed from temptation. But
having thus divulged my Viking’s weak; side, I earnestly entreat, that
it may not disparage him in any charitable man’s estimation. Only
think, how many more there are like him to say nothing further of
Alexander the Great—especially among his own class; and consider, I
beseech, that the most capacious-souled fellows, for that very reason,
are the most apt to be too liberal in their libations; since, being so
large-hearted, they hold so much more good cheer than others.

For Samoa, from his utter silence hitherto as to aught inebriating on
board, I concluded, that, along with his other secrets, the departed
captain had very wisely kept his Otard to himself.

Nor did I doubt, but that the Upoluan, like all Polynesians, much loved
getting high of head; and in that state, would be more intractable than
a Black Forest boar. And concerning Annatoo, I shuddered to think, how
that Otard might inflame her into a Fury more fierce than the foremost
of those that pursued Orestes.

In good time, then, bethinking me of the peril of publishing my
discovery;—bethinking me of the quiet, lazy, ever-present perils of the
voyage, of all circumstances, the very worst under which to introduce
an intoxicating beverage to my companions, I resolved to withhold it
from them altogether.

So impressed was I with all this, that for a moment, I was almost
tempted to roll over the cask on its bilge, remove the stopper, and
suffer its contents to mix with the foul water at the bottom of the
hold.

But no, no: What: dilute the brine with the double distilled soul of
the precious grape? Haft himself would have haunted me!

Then again, it might come into play medicinally; and Paracelsus himself
stands sponsor for every cup drunk for the good of the abdomen. So at
last, I determined to let it remain where it was: visiting it
occasionally, by myself, for inspection.

But by way of advice to all ship-masters, let me say, that if your
Otard magazine be exposed to view—then, in the evil hour of wreck,
stave in your spirit-casks, ere rigging the life-boat.




CHAPTER XXXIV.
How They Steered On Their Way


When we quitted the Chamois for the brigantine, we must have been at
least two hundred leagues to the westward of the spot, where we had
abandoned the Arcturion. Though how far we might then have been, North
or South of the Equator, I could not with any certainty divine.

But that we were not removed any considerable distance from the Line,
seemed obvious. For in the starriest night no sign of the extreme Polar
constellations was visible; though often we scanned the northern and
southern horizon in search of them. So far as regards the aspect of the
skies near the ocean’s rim, the difference of several degrees in one’s
latitude at sea, is readily perceived by a person long accustomed to
surveying the heavens.

If correct in my supposition, concerning our longitude at the time here
alluded to, and allowing for what little progress we had been making in
the Parki, there now remained some one hundred leagues to sail, ere the
country we sought would be found. But for obvious reasons, how long
precisely we might continue to float out of sight of land, it was
impossible to say. Calms, light breezes, and currents made every thing
uncertain. Nor had we any method of estimating our due westward
progress, except by what is called Dead Reckoning,—the computation of
the knots run hourly; allowances’ being made for the supposed
deviations from our course, by reason of the ocean streams; which at
times in this quarter of the Pacific run with very great velocity.

Now, in many respects we could not but feel safer aboard the Parki than
in the Chamois. The sense of danger is less vivid, the greater the
number of lives involved. He who is ready to despair in solitary peril,
plucks up a heart in the presence of another. In a plurality of
comrades is much countenance and consolation.

Still, in the brigantine there were many sources of uneasiness and
anxiety unknown to me in the whale-boat. True, we had now between us
and the deep, five hundred good planks to one lath in our buoyant
little chip. But the Parki required more care and attention; especially
by night, when a vigilant look-out was indispensable. With impunity, in
our whale-boat, we might have run close to shoal or reef; whereas,
similar carelessness or temerity now, might prove fatal to all
concerned.

Though in the joyous sunlight, sailing through the sparkling sea, I was
little troubled with serious misgivings; in the hours of darkness it
was quite another thing. And the apprehensions, nay terrors I felt,
were much augmented by the remissness of both Jarl and Samoa, in
keeping their night-watches. Several times I was seized with a deadly
panic, and earnestly scanned the murky horizon, when rising from
slumber I found the steersman, in whose hands for the time being were
life and death, sleeping upright against the tiller, as much of a
fixture there, as the open-mouthed dragon rudely carved on our prow.

Were it not, that on board of other vessels, I myself had many a time
dozed at the helm, spite of all struggles, I would have been almost at
a loss to account for this heedlessness in my comrades. But it seemed
as if the mere sense of our situation, should have been sufficient to
prevent the like conduct in all on board our craft.

Samoa’s aspect, sleeping at the tiller, was almost appalling. His large
opal eyes were half open; and turned toward the light of the binnacle,
gleamed between the lids like bars of flame. And added to all, was his
giant stature and savage lineaments.

It was in vain, that I remonstrated, begged, or threatened: the
occasional drowsiness of my fellow-voyagers proved incurable. To no
purpose, I reminded my Viking that sleeping in the night-watch in a
craft like ours, was far different from similar heedlessness on board
the Arcturion. For there, our place upon the ocean was always known,
and our distance from land; so that when by night the seamen were
permitted to be drowsy, it was mostly, because the captain well knew
that strict watchfulness could be dispensed with.

Though in all else, the Skyeman proved a most faithful ally, in this
one thing he was either perversely obtuse, or infatuated. Or, perhaps,
finding himself once more in a double-decked craft, which rocked him as
of yore, he was lulled into a deceitful security.

For Samoa, his drowsiness was the drowsiness of one beat on sleep, come
dreams or death. He seemed insensible to the peril we ran. Often I sent
the sleepy savage below, sad, steered myself till morning. At last I
made a point of slumbering much by day, the better to stand watch by
night; though I made Samoa and Jarl regularly go through with their
allotted four hours each.

It has been mentioned, that Annatoo took her turn at the helm; but it
was only by day. And in justice to the lady, I must affirm, that upon
the whole she acquitted herself well. For notwithstanding the syren
face in the binnacle, which dimly allured her glances, Annatoo after
all was tolerably heedful of her steering. Indeed she took much pride
therein; always ready for her turn; with marvelous exactitude
calculating the approaching hour, as it came on in regular rotation.
Her time-piece was ours, the sun. By night it must have been her
guardian star; for frequently she gazed up at a particular section of
the heavens, like one regarding the dial in a tower.

By some odd reasoning or other, she had cajoled herself into the
notion, that whoever steered the brigantine, for that period was
captain. Wherefore, she gave herself mighty airs at the tiller; with
extravagant gestures issuing unintelligible orders about trimming the
sails, or pitching overboard something to see how fast we were going.
All this much diverted my Viking, who several times was delivered of a
laugh; a loud and healthy one to boot: a phenomenon worthy the
chronicling.

And thus much for Annatoo, preliminary to what is further to be said.
Seeing the drowsiness of Jarl and Samoa, which so often kept me from my
hammock at night, forcing me to repose by day, when I far preferred
being broad awake, I decided to let Annatoo take her turn at the night
watches; which several times she had solicited me to do; railing at the
sleepiness of her spouse; though abstaining from all reflections upon
Jarl, toward whom she had of late grown exceedingly friendly.

Now the Calmuc stood her first night watch to admiration; if any thing,
was altogether too wakeful. The mere steering of the craft employed not
sufficiently her active mind. Ever and anon she must needs rush from
the tiller to take a parenthetical pull at the fore- brace, the end of
which led down to the bulwarks near by; then refreshing herself with a
draught or two of water and a biscuit, she would continue to steer
away, full of the importance of her office. At any unusual flapping of
the sails, a violent stamping on deck announced the fact to the
startled crew. Finding her thus indefatigable, I readily induced her to
stand two watches to Jarl’s and Samoa’s one; and when she was at the
helm, I permitted myself to doze on a pile of old sails, spread every
evening on the quarter-deck.

It was the Skyeman, who often admonished me to “heave the ship to”
every night, thus stopping her headway till morning; a plan which,
under other circumstances, might have perhaps warranted the slumbers of
all. But as it was, such a course would have been highly imprudent. For
while making no onward progress through the water, the rapid currents
we encountered would continually be drifting us eastward; since,
contrary to our previous experience, they seemed latterly to have
reversed their flow, a phenomenon by no means unusual in the vicinity
of the Line in the Pacific. And this it was that so prolonged our
passage to the westward. Even in a moderate breeze, I sometimes
fancied, that the impulse of the wind little more than counteracted the
glide of the currents; so that with much show of sailing, we were in
reality almost a fixture on the sea.

The equatorial currents of the South Seas may be regarded as among the
most mysterious of the mysteries of the deep. Whence they come, whither
go, who knows? Tell us, what hidden law regulates their flow.
Regardless of the theory which ascribes to them a nearly uniform course
from east to west, induced by the eastwardly winds of the Line, and the
collateral action of the Polar streams; these currents are forever
shifting. Nor can the period of their revolutions be at all relied upon
or predicted.

But however difficult it may be to assign a specific cause for the
ocean streams, in any part of the world, one of the wholesome effects
thereby produced would seem obvious enough. And though the circumstance
here alluded to is perhaps known to every body, it may be questioned,
whether it is generally invested with the importance it deserves.
Reference is here made to the constant commingling and purification of
the sea-water by reason of the currents.

For, that the ocean, according to the popular theory, possesses a
special purifying agent in its salts, is somewhat to be doubted. Nor
can it be explicitly denied, that those very salts might corrupt it,
were it not for the brisk circulation of its particles consequent upon
the flow of the streams. It is well known to seamen, that a bucket of
sea-water, left standing in a tropical climate, very soon becomes
highly offensive; which is not the case with rainwater.

But I build no theories. And by way of obstructing the one, which might
possibly be evolved from the statement above, let me add, that the
offensiveness of sea-water left standing, may arise in no small degree
from the presence of decomposed animal matter.




CHAPTER XXXV.
Ah, Annatoo!


In order to a complete revelation, I must needs once again discourse of
Annatoo and her pilferings; and to what those pilferings led. In the
simplicity of my soul, I fancied that the dame, so much flattered as
she needs must have been, by the confidence I began to repose in her,
would now mend her ways, and abstain from her larcenies. But not so.
She was possessed by some scores of devils, perpetually her to mischief
on their own separate behoof, and not less for many of her pranks were
of no earthly advantage to her, present or prospective.

One day the log-reel was missing. Summon Annatoo. She came; but knew
nothing about it. Jarl spent a whole morning in contriving a
substitute; and a few days after, pop, we came upon the lost: article
hidden away in the main-top.

Another time, discovering the little vessel to “gripe” hard in
steering, as if some one under water were jerking her backward, we
instituted a diligent examination, to see what was the matter. When lo;
what should we find but a rope, cunningly attached to one of the
chain-plates under the starboard main-channel. It towed heavily in the
water. Upon dragging it up—much as you would the cord of a ponderous
bucket far down in a well—a stout wooden box was discovered at the end;
which opened, disclosed sundry knives, hatchets, and ax-heads.

Called to the stand, the Upoluan deposed, that thrice he had rescued
that identical box from Annatoo’s all-appropriating clutches.

Now, here were four human beings shut up in this little oaken craft,
and, for the time being, their interests the same. What sane mortal,
then, would forever be committing thefts, without rhyme or reason. It
was like stealing silver from one pocket and decanting it into the
other. And what might it not lead to in the end?

Why, ere long, in good sooth, it led to the abstraction of the compass
from the binnacle; so that we were fain to substitute for it, the one
brought along in the Chamois.

It was Jarl that first published this last and alarming theft. Annatoo
being at the helm at dawn, he had gone to relieve her; and looking to
see how we headed, was horror-struck at the emptiness of the binnacle.

I started to my feet; sought out the woman, and ferociously demanded
the compass. But her face was a blank; every word a denial.

Further lenity was madness. I summoned Samoa, told him what had
happened, and affirmed that there was no safety for us except in the
nightly incarceration of his spouse. To this he privily assented; and
that very evening, when Annatoo descended into the forecastle, we
barred over her the scuttle-slide. Long she clamored, but unavailingly.
And every night this was repeated; the dame saying her vespers most
energetically.

It has somewhere been hinted, that Annatoo occasionally cast sheep’s
eyes at Jarl. So I was not a little surprised when her manner toward
him decidedly changed. Pulling at the ropes with us, she would give him
sly pinches, and then look another way, innocent as a lamb. Then again,
she would refuse to handle the same piece of rigging with him; with wry
faces, rinsed out the wooden can at the water cask, if it so chanced
that my Viking had previously been drinking therefrom. At other times,
when the honest Skyeman came up from below, she would set up a shout of
derision, and loll out her tongue; accompanying all this by certain
indecorous and exceedingly unladylike gestures, significant of the
profound contempt in which she held him.

Yet, never did Jarl heed her ill-breeding; but patiently overlooked and
forgave it. Inquiring the reason of the dame’s singular conduct, I
learned, that with eye averted, she had very lately crept close to my
Viking, and met with no tender reception.

Doubtless, Jarl, who was much of a philosopher, innocently imagined
that ere long the lady would forgive and forget him. But what knows a
philosopher about women?

Ere long, so outrageous became Annatoo’s detestation of him, that the
honest old tar could stand it no longer, and like most good-natured men
when once fairly roused, he was swept through and through with a
terrible typhoon of passion. He proposed, that forthwith the woman
should be sacked and committed to the deep; he could stand it no
longer.

Murder is catching. At first I almost jumped at the proposition; but as
quickly rejected it. Ah! Annatoo: Woman unendurable: deliver me, ye
gods, from being shut up in a ship with such a hornet again.

But are we yet through with her? Not yet. Hitherto she had continued to
perform the duties of the office assigned her since the commencement of
the voyage: namely, those of the culinary department. From this she was
now deposed. Her skewer was broken. My Viking solemnly averring, that
he would eat nothing more of her concocting, for fear of being
poisoned. For myself, I almost believed, that there was malice enough
in the minx to give us our henbane broth.

But what said Samoa to all this? Passing over the matter of the
cookery, will it be credited, that living right among us as he did, he
was yet blind to the premeditated though unachieved peccadilloes of his
spouse? Yet so it was. And thus blind was Belisarius himself,
concerning the intrigues of Antonina.

Witness that noble dame’s affair with the youth Theodosius; when her
deluded lord charged upon the scandal-mongers with the very horns she
had bestowed upon him.

Upon one occasion, seized with a sudden desire to palliate Annatoo’s
thievings, Samoa proudly intimated, that the lady was the most virtuous
of her sex.

But alas, poor Annatoo, why say more? And bethinking me of the hard
fate that so soon overtook thee, I almost repent what has already and
too faithfully been portrayed.




CHAPTER XXXVI.
The Parki Gives Up The Ghost


A long calm in the boat, and now, God help us, another in the
brigantine. It was airless and profound.

In that hot calm, we lay fixed and frozen in like Parry at the Pole.
The sun played upon the glassy sea like the sun upon the glaciers.

At the end of two days we lifted up our eyes and beheld a low,
creeping, hungry cloud expanding like an army, wing and wing, along the
eastern horizon. Instantly Jarl bode me take heed.

Here be it said, that though for weeks and weeks reign over the
equatorial latitudes of the Pacific, the mildest and sunniest of days;
that nevertheless, when storms do come, they come in their strength:
spending in a few, brief blasts their concentrated rage. They come like
the Mamelukes: they charge, and away.

It wanted full an hour to sunset; but the sun was well nigh obscured.
It seemed toiling among bleak Scythian steeps in the hazy background.
Above the storm-cloud flitted ominous patches of scud, rapidly
advancing and receding: Attila’s skirmishers, thrown forward in the van
of his Huns. Beneath, a fitful shadow slid along the surface. As we
gazed, the cloud came nearer; accelerating its approach.

With all haste we proceeded to furl the sails, which, owing to the
calm, had been hanging loose in the brails. And by help of a spare
boom, used on the forecastle-deck sit a sweep or great oar, we
endeavored to cast the brigantine’s head toward the foe.

The storm seemed about to overtake us; but we felt no breeze. The
noiseless cloud stole on; its advancing shadow lowering over a distinct
and prominent milk-white crest upon the surface of the ocean. But now
this line of surging foam came rolling down upon us like a white charge
of cavalry: mad Hotspur and plumed Murat at its head; pouring right
forward in a continuous frothy cascade, which curled over, and fell
upon the glassy sea before it.

Still, no breath of air. But of a sudden, like a blow from a man’s
hand, and before our canvas could be secured, the stunned craft, giving
one lurch to port, was stricken down on her beam-ends; the roaring tide
dashed high up against her windward side, and drops of brine fell upon
the deck, heavy as drops of gore.

It was all a din and a mist; a crashing of spars and of ropes; a
horrible blending of sights and of sounds; as for an instant we seemed
in the hot heart of the gale; our cordage, like harp-strings, shrieking
above the fury of the blast. The masts rose, and swayed, and dipped
their trucks in the sea. And like unto some stricken buffalo brought
low to the plain, the brigantine’s black hull, shaggy with sea-weed,
lay panting on its flank in the foam.

Frantically we clung to the uppermost bulwarks. And now, loud above the
roar of the sea, was suddenly heard a sharp, splintering sound, as of a
Norway woodman felling a pine in the forest. It was brave Jarl, who
foremost of all had snatched from its rack against the mainmast, the
ax, always there kept.

“Cut the lanyards to windward!” he cried; and again buried his ax into
the mast. He was quickly obeyed. And upon cutting the third lanyard of
the five, he shouted for us to pause. Dropping his ax, he climbed up to
windward. As he clutched the rail, the wounded mast snapped in twain
with a report like a cannon. A slight smoke was perceptible where it
broke. The remaining lanyards parted. From the violent strain upon
them, the two shrouds flew madly into the air, and one of the great
blocks at their ends, striking Annatoo upon the forehead, she let go
her hold upon a stanchion, and sliding across the aslant deck, was
swallowed up in the whirlpool under our lea. Samoa shrieked. But there
was no time to mourn; no hand could reach to save.

By the connecting stays, the mainmast carried over with it the
foremast; when we instantly righted, and for the time were saved; my
own royal Viking our saviour.

The first fury of the gale was gone. But far to leeward was seen the
even, white line of its onset, pawing the ocean into foam. All round
us, the sea boiled like ten thousand caldrons; and through eddy, wave,
and surge, our almost water-logged craft waded heavily; every dead
clash ringing hollow against her hull, like blows upon a coffin.

We floated a wreck. With every pitch we lifted our dangling jib-boom
into the air; and beating against the side, were the shattered
fragments of the masts. From these we made all haste to be free, by
cutting the rigging that held them.

Soon, the worst of the gale was blown over. But the sea ran high. Yet
the rack and scud of the tempest, its mad, tearing foam, was subdued
into immense, long-extended, and long-rolling billows; the white cream
on their crests like snow on the Andes. Ever and anon we hung poised on
their brows; when the furrowed ocean all round looked like a panorama
from Chimborazo.

A few hours more, and the surges went down. There was a moderate sea, a
steady breeze, and a clear, starry sky. Such was the storm that came
after our calm.




CHAPTER XXXVII.
Once More They Take To The Chamois


Try the pumps. We dropped the sinker, and found the Parki bleeding at
every pore. Up from her well, the water, spring-like, came bubbling,
pure and limpid as the water of Saratoga. Her time had come. But by
keeping two hands at the pumps, we had no doubt she would float till
daylight; previous to which we liked not to abandon her.

The interval was employed in clanging at the pump-breaks, and preparing
the Chamois for our reception. So soon as the sea permitted, we lowered
it over the side; and letting it float under the stern, stowed it with
water and provisions, together with various other things, including
muskets and cutlasses.

Shortly after daylight, a violent jostling and thumping under foot
showed that the water, gaining rapidly in the, hold, spite of all
pumping, had floated the lighter casks up-ward to the deck, against
which they were striking.

Now, owing to the number of empty butts in the hold, there would have
been, perhaps, but small danger of the vessel’s sinking outright—all
awash as her decks would soon be—were it not, that many of her timbers
were of a native wood, which, like the Teak of India, is specifically
heavier than water. This, with the pearl shells on board, counteracted
the buoyancy of the casks.

At last, the sun—long waited for—arose; the Parki meantime sinking
lower and lower.

All things being in readiness, we proceeded to embark from the wreck,
as from a wharf.

But not without some show of love for our poor brigantine.

To a seaman, a ship is no piece of mechanism merely; but a creature of
thoughts and fancies, instinct with life. Standing at her vibrating
helm, you feel her beating pulse. I have loved ships, as I have loved
men.

To abandon the poor Parki was like leaving to its fate something that
could feel. It was meet that she should die decently and bravely.

All this thought the Skyeman. Samoa and I were in the boat, calling
upon him to enter quickly, lest the vessel should sink, and carry us
down in the eddies; for already she had gone round twice. But cutting
adrift the last fragments of her broken shrouds, and putting her decks
in order, Jarl buried his ax in the splintered stump of the mainmast,
and not till then did he join us.

We slowly cheered, and sailed away.

Not ten minutes after, the hull rolled convulsively in the sea; went
round once more; lifted its sharp prow as a man with arms pointed for a
dive; gave a long seething plunge; and went down.

Many of her old planks were twice wrecked; once strown upon ocean’s
beach; now dropped into its lowermost vaults, with the bones of drowned
ships and drowned men.

Once more afloat in our shell! But not with the intrepid spirit that
shoved off with us from the deck of the Arcturion. A bold deed done
from impulse, for the time carries few or no misgivings along with it.
But forced upon you, its terrors stare you in the face. So now. I had
pushed from the Arcturion with a stout heart; but quitting the sinking
Parki, my heart sunk with her.

With a fair wind, we held on our way westward, hoping to see land
before many days.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.
The Sea On Fire


The night following our abandonment of the Parki, was made memorable by
a remarkable spectacle.

Slumbering in the bottom of the boat, Jarl and I were suddenly awakened
by Samoa. Starting, we beheld the ocean of a pallid white color,
corruscating all over with tiny golden sparkles. But the pervading hue
of the water cast a cadaverous gleam upon the boat, so that we looked
to each other like ghosts. For many rods astern our wake was revealed
in a line of rushing illuminated foam; while here and there beneath the
surface, the tracks of sharks were denoted by vivid, greenish trails,
crossing and recrossing each other in every direction. Farther away,
and distributed in clusters, floated on the sea, like constellations in
the heavens, innumerable Medusae, a species of small, round, refulgent
fish, only to be met with in the South Seas and the Indian Ocean.

Suddenly, as we gazed, there shot high into the air a bushy jet of
flashes, accompanied by the unmistakable deep breathing sound of a
sperm whale. Soon, the sea all round us spouted in fountains of fire;
and vast forms, emitting a glare from their flanks, and ever and anon
raising their heads above water, and shaking off the sparkles, showed
where an immense shoal of Cachalots had risen from below to sport in
these phosphorescent billows.

The vapor jetted forth was far more radiant than any portion of the
sea; ascribable perhaps to the originally luminous fluid contracting
still more brilliancy from its passage through the spouting canal of
the whales.

We were in great fear, lest without any vicious intention the
Leviathans might destroy us, by coming into close contact with our
boat. We would have shunned them; but they were all round and round us.
Nevertheless we were safe; for as we parted the pallid brine, the
peculiar irradiation which shot from about our keel seemed to deter
them. Apparently discovering us of a sudden, many of them plunged
headlong down into the water, tossing their fiery tails high into the
air, and leaving the sea still more sparkling from the violent surging
of their descent.

Their general course seemed the same as our own; to the westward. To
remove from them, we at last out oars, and pulled toward the north. So
doing, we were steadily pursued by a solitary whale, that must have
taken our Chamois for a kindred fish. Spite of all our efforts, he drew
nearer and nearer; at length rubbing his fiery flank against the
Chamois’ gunwale, here and there leaving long strips of the glossy
transparent substance which thin as gossamer invests the body of the
Cachalot.

In terror at a sight so new, Samoa shrank. But Jarl and I, more used to
the intimate companionship of the whales, pushed the boat away from it
with our oars: a thing often done in the fishery.

The close vicinity of the whale revived in the so long astute Skyeman
all the enthusiasm of his daring vocation. However quiet by nature, a
thorough-bred whaleman betrays no little excitement in sight of his
game. And it required some persuasion to prevent Jarl from darting his
harpoon: insanity under present circumstances; and of course without
object. But “Oh! for a dart,” cried my Viking. And “Where’s now our old
ship?” he added reminiscently.

But to my great joy the monster at last departed; rejoining the shoal,
whose lofty spoutings of flame were still visible upon the distant line
of the horizon; showing there, like the fitful starts of the Aurora
Borealis.

The sea retained its luminosity for about three hours; at the
expiration of half that period beginning to fade; and excepting
occasional faint illuminations consequent upon the rapid darting of
fish under water, the phenomenon at last wholly disappeared.

Heretofore, I had beheld several exhibitions of marine phosphorescence,
both in the Atlantic and Pacific. But nothing in comparison with what
was seen that night. In the Atlantic, there is very seldom any portion
of the ocean luminous, except the crests of the waves; and these mostly
appear so during wet, murky weather. Whereas, in the Pacific, all
instances of the sort, previously corning under my notice, had been
marked by patches of greenish light, unattended with any pallidness of
sea. Save twice on the coast of Peru, where I was summoned from my
hammock to the alarming midnight cry of “All hands ahoy! tack ship!”
And rushing on deck, beheld the sea white as a shroud; for which reason
it was feared we were on soundings.

Now, sailors love marvels, and love to repeat them. And from many an
old shipmate I have heard various sage opinings, concerning the
phenomenon in question. Dismissing, as destitute of sound philosophic
probability, the extravagant notion of one of my nautical friends—no
less a philosopher than my Viking himself—namely: that the
phosphoresence of the sea is caused by a commotion among the mermaids,
whose golden locks, all torn and disheveled, do irradiate the waters at
such times; I proceed to record more reliable theories.

Faraday might, perhaps, impute the phenomenon to a peculiarly
electrical condition of the atmosphere; and to that solely. But herein,
my scientific friend would be stoutly contradicted by many intelligent
seamen, who, in part, impute it to the presence of large quantities of
putrescent animal matter; with which the sea is well known to abound.

And it would seem not unreasonable to suppose, that it is by this means
that the fluid itself becomes charged with the luminous principle. Draw
a bucket of water from the phosphorescent ocean, and it still retains
traces of fire; but, standing awhile, this soon subsides. Now pour it
along the deck, and it is a stream of flame; caused by its renewed
agitation. Empty the bucket, and for a space sparkles cling to it
tenaciously; and every stave seems ignited.

But after all, this seeming ignition of the sea can not be wholly
produced by dead matter therein. There are many living fish,
phosphorescent; and, under certain conditions, by a rapid throwing off
of luminous particles must largely contribute to the result. Not to
particularize this circumstance as true of divers species of sharks,
cuttle-fish, and many others of the larger varieties of the finny
tribes; the myriads of microscopic mollusca, well known to swarm off
soundings, might alone be deemed almost sufficient to kindle a fire in
the brine.

But these are only surmises; likely, but uncertain.

After science comes sentiment.

A French naturalist maintains, that the nocturnal radiance of the
fire-fly is purposely intended as an attraction to the opposite sex;
that the artful insect illuminates its body for a beacon to love. Thus:
perched upon the edge of a leaf, and waiting the approach of her
Leander, who comes buffeting with his wings the aroma of the flowers,
some insect Hero may show a torch to her gossamer gallant.

But alas, thrice alas, for the poor little fire-fish of the sea, whose
radiance but reveals them to their foes, and lights the way to their
destruction.




CHAPTER XXXIX.
They Fall In With Strangers


After quitting the Parki, we had much calm weather, varied by light
breezes. And sailing smoothly over a sea, so recently one sheet of
foam, I could not avoid bethinking me, how fortunate it was, that the
gale had overtaken us in the brigantine, and not in the Chamois. For
deservedly high as the whale-shallop ranks as a sea boat; still, in a
severe storm, the larger your craft the greater your sense of security.
Wherefore, the thousand reckless souls tenanting a line-of- battle ship
scoff at the most awful hurricanes; though, in reality, they may be
less safe in their wooden-walled Troy, than those who contend with the
gale in a clipper.

But not only did I congratulate myself upon salvation from the past,
but upon the prospect for the future. For storms happening so seldom in
these seas, one just blown over is almost a sure guarantee of very many
weeks’ calm weather to come.

Now sun followed sun; and no land. And at length it almost seemed as if
we must have sailed past the remotest presumable westerly limit of the
chain of islands we sought; a lurking suspicion which I sedulously kept
to myself However, I could not but nourish a latent faith that all
would yet be well.

On the ninth day my forebodings were over. In the gray of the dawn,
perched upon the peak of our sail, a noddy was seen fast asleep. This
freak was true to the nature of that curious fowl, whose name is
significant of its drowsiness. Its plumage was snow-white, its bill and
legs blood-red; the latter looking like little pantalettes. In a sly
attempt at catching the bird, Samoa captured three tail- feathers; the
alarmed creature flying away with a scream, and leaving its quills in
his hand.

Sailing on, we gradually broke in upon immense low-sailing flights of
other aquatic fowls, mostly of those species which are seldom found far
from land: terns, frigate-birds, mollymeaux, reef-pigeons, boobies,
gulls, and the like. They darkened the air; their wings making overhead
an incessant rustling like the simultaneous turning over of ten
thousand leaves. The smaller sort skimmed the sea like pebbles sent
skipping from the shore. Over these, flew myriads of birds of broader
wing. While high above all, soared in air the daring “Diver,” or
sea-kite, the power of whose vision is truly wonderful. It perceives
the little flying-fish in the water, at a height which can not be less
than four hundred feet. Spirally wheeling and screaming as it goes, the
sea-kite, bill foremost, darts downward, swoops into the water, and for
a moment altogether disappearing, emerges at last; its prey firmly
trussed in its claws. But bearing it aloft, the bold bandit is quickly
assailed by other birds of prey, that strive to wrest from him his
booty. And snatched from his talons, you see the fish falling through
the air, till again caught up in the very act of descent, by the
fleetest of its pursuers.

Leaving these sights astern, we presently picked up the slimy husk of a
cocoanut, all over green barnacles. And shortly after, passed two or
three limbs of trees, and the solitary trunk of a palm; which, upon
sailing nearer, seemed but very recently started on its endless voyage.
As noon came on; the dark purple land-haze, which had been dimly
descried resting upon the western horizon, was very nearly obscured.
Nevertheless, behind that dim drapery we doubted not bright boughs were
waving.

We were now in high spirits. Samoa between times humming to himself
some heathenish ditty, and Jarl ten times more intent on his silence
than ever; yet his eye full of expectation and gazing broad off from
our bow. Of a sudden, shading his face with his hand, he gazed fixedly
for an instant, and then springing to his feet, uttered the long-drawn
sound—“Sail ho!”

Just tipping the furthest edge of the sky was a little speck, dancing
into view every time we rose upon the swells. It looked like one of
many birds; for half intercepting our view, fell showers of plumage: a
flight of milk-white noddies flying downward to the sea.

But soon the birds are seen no more. Yet there remains the speck;
plainly a sail; but too small for a ship. Was it a boat after a whale?
The vessel to which it belonged far astern, and shrouded by the haze?
So it seemed.

Quietly, however, we waited the stranger’s nearer approach; confident,
that for some time he would not be able to perceive us, owing to our
being in what mariners denominate the “sun-glade,” or that part of the
ocean upon which the sun’s rays flash with peculiar intensity.

As the sail drew nigh, its failing to glisten white led us to doubt
whether it was indeed a whale-boat. Presently, it showed yellow; and
Samoa declared, that it must be the sail of some island craft. True.
The stranger proving a large double-canoe, like those used by the
Polynesians in making passages between distant islands.

The Upoluan was now clamorous for a meeting, to which Jarl was averse.
Deliberating a moment, I directed the muskets to be loaded; then
setting the sail the wind on our quarter—we headed away for the canoe,
now sailing at right angles with our previous course.

Here it must be mentioned, that from the various gay cloths and other
things provided for barter by the captain of the Parki, I had very
strikingly improved my costume; making it free, flowing, and eastern. I
looked like an Emir. Nor had my Viking neglected to follow my example;
though with some few modifications of his own. With his long tangled
hair and harpoon, he looked like the sea-god, that boards ships, for
the first time crossing the Equator. For tatooed Samoa, he yet sported
both kilt and turban, reminding one of a tawny leopard, though his
spots were all in one place. Besides this raiment of ours, against
emergencies we had provided our boat with divers nankeens and silks.

But now into full view comes a yoke of huge clumsy prows, shaggy with
carving, and driving through the water with considerable velocity; the
immense sprawling sail holding the wind like a bag. She seemed full of
men; and from the dissonant cries borne over to us, and the canoe’s
widely yawing, it was plain that we had occasioned no small sensation.
They seemed undetermined what course to pursue: whether to court a
meeting, or avoid it; whether to regard us as friends or foes.

As we came still nearer, distinctly beholding their faces, we loudly
hailed them, inviting them to furl their sails, and allow us to board
them. But no answer was returned; their confusion increasing. And now,
within less than two ships’-lengths, they swept right across our bow,
gazing at us with blended curiosity and fear.

Their craft was about thirty feet long, consisting of a pair of
parallel canoes, very narrow, and at the distance of a yard or so,
lengthwise, united by stout cross-timbers, lashed across the four
gunwales. Upon these timbers was a raised platform or dais, quite dry;
and astern an arched cabin or tent; behind which, were two broad-bladed
paddles terminating in rude shark-tails, by which the craft was
steered.

The yard, spreading a yellow sail, was a crooked bough, supported
obliquely in the crotch of a mast, to which the green bark was still
clinging. Here and there were little tufts of moss. The high, beaked
prow of that canoe in which the mast was placed, resembled a rude
altar; and all round it was suspended a great variety of fruits,
including scores of cocoanuts, unhusked. This prow was railed off,
forming a sort of chancel within.

The foremost beam, crossing the gunwales, extended some twelve feet
beyond the side of the dais; and at regular intervals hereupon, stout
cords were fastened, which, leading up to the head of the mast,
answered the purpose of shrouds. The breeze was now streaming fresh;
and, as if to force down into the water the windward side of the craft,
five men stood upon this long beam, grasping five shrouds. Yet they
failed to counterbalance the pressure of the sail; and owing to the
opposite inclination of the twin canoes, these living statues were
elevated high above the water; their appearance rendered still more
striking by their eager attitudes, and the apparent peril of their
position, as the mad spray from the bow dashed over them. Suddenly, the
Islanders threw their craft into the wind; while, for ourselves, we lay
on our oars, fearful of alarming them by now coming nearer. But hailing
them again, we said we were friends; and had friendly gifts for them,
if they would peaceably permit us to approach. This understood, there
ensued a mighty clamor; insomuch, that I bade Jarl and Samoa out oars,
and row very gently toward the strangers. Whereupon, amid a storm of
vociferations, some of them hurried to the furthest side of their dais;
standing with arms arched over their heads, as if for a dive; others
menacing us with clubs and spears; and one, an old man with a bamboo
trellis on his head forming a sort of arbor for his hair, planted
himself full before the tent, stretching behind him a wide plaited
sling.

Upon this hostile display, Samoa dropped his oar, and brought his piece
to bear upon the old man, who, by his attitude, seemed to menace us
with the fate of the great braggart of Gath. But I quickly knocked down
the muzzle of his musket, and forbade the slightest token of hostility;
enjoining it upon my companions, nevertheless, to keep well on their
guard.

We now ceased rowing, and after a few minutes’ uproar in the canoe,
they ran to the steering-paddles, and forcing round their craft before
the wind, rapidly ran away from us. With all haste we set our sail, and
pulling also at our oars, soon overtook them, determined upon coming
into closer communion.




CHAPTER XL.
Sire And Sons


Seeing flight was useless, the Islanders again stopped their canoe, and
once more we cautiously drew nearer; myself crying out to them not to
be fearful; and Samoa, with the odd humor of his race, averring that he
had known every soul of them from his infancy.

We approached within two or three yards; when we paused, which somewhat
allayed their alarm. Fastening a red China handkerchief to the blade of
our long mid-ship oar, I waved it in the air. A lively clapping of
hands, and many wild exclamations.

While yet waving the flag, I whispered to Jarl to give the boat a sheer
toward the canoe, which being adroitly done, brought the bow, where I
stood, still nearer to the Islanders. I then dropped the silk among
them; and the Islander, who caught it, at once handed it to the warlike
old man with the sling; who, on seating himself, spread it before him;
while the rest crowding round, glanced rapidly from the wonderful gift,
to the more wonderful donors.

This old man was the superior of the party. And Samoa asserted, that he
must be a priest of the country to which the Islanders belonged; that
the craft could be no other than one of their sacred canoes, bound on
some priestly voyage. All this he inferred from the altar- like prow,
and there being no women on board.

Bent upon conciliating the old priest, I dropped into the canoe another
silk handkerchief; while Samoa loudly exclaimed, that we were only
three men, and were peaceably inclined. Meantime, old Aaron, fastening
the two silks crosswise over his shoulders, like a brace of Highland
plaids, crosslegged sat, and eyed us.

It was a curious sight. The old priest, like a scroll of old parchment,
covered all over with hieroglyphical devices, harder to interpret, I’ll
warrant, than any old Sanscrit manuscript. And upon his broad brow,
deep-graven in wrinkles, were characters still more mysterious, which
no Champollion nor gipsy could have deciphered. He looked old as the
elderly hills; eyes sunken, though bright; and head white as the summit
of Mont Blanc.

The rest were a youthful and comely set: their complexion that of Gold
Sherry, and all tattooed after this pattern: two broad cross- stripes
on the chest and back; reaching down to the waist, like a
foot-soldier’s harness. Their faces were full of expression; and their
mouths were full of fine teeth; so that the parting of their lips, was
as the opening of pearl oysters. Marked, here and there, after the
style of Tahiti, with little round figures in blue, dotted in the
middle with a spot of vermilion, their brawny brown thighs looked not
unlike the gallant hams of Westphalia, spotted with the red dust of
Cayenne.

But what a marvelous resemblance in the features of all. Were they born
at one birth? This resemblance was heightened by their uniform marks.
But it was subsequently ascertained, that they were the children of one
sire; and that sire, old Aaron; who, no doubt, reposed upon his sons,
as an old general upon the trophies of his youth.

They were the children of as many mothers; and he was training them up
for the priesthood.




CHAPTER XLI.
A Fray


So bent were the strangers upon concealing who they were, and the
object of their voyage, that it was some time ere we could obtain the
information we desired.

They pointed toward the tent, as if it contained their Eleusinian
mysteries. And the old priest gave us to know, that it would be
profanation to enter it.

But all this only roused my curiosity to unravel the wonder.

At last I succeeded.

In that mysterious tent was concealed a beautiful maiden. And, in
pursuance of a barbarous custom, by Aleema, the priest, she was being
borne an offering from the island of Amma to the gods of Tedaidee.

Now, hearing of the maiden, I waited for no more. Need I add, how
stirred was my soul toward this invisible victim; and how hotly I
swore, that precious blood of hers should never smoke upon an altar. If
we drowned for it, I was bent upon rescuing the captive. But as yet, no
gentle signal of distress had been waved to us from the tent. Thence,
no sound could be heard, but an occasional rustle of the matting. Was
it possible, that one about to be immolated could proceed thus
tranquilly to her fate?

But desperately as I resolved to accomplish the deliverance of the
maiden, it was best to set heedfully about it. I desired no shedding of
blood; though the odds were against us.

The old priest seemed determined to prevent us from boarding his craft.
But being equally determined the other way, I cautiously laid the bow
of the Chamois against the canoe’s quarter, so as to present the
smallest possible chance for a hostile entrance into our boat. Then,
Samoa, knife in ear, and myself with a cutlass, stepped upon the dais,
leaving Jarl in the boat’s head, equipped with his harpoon; three
loaded muskets lying by his side. He was strictly enjoined to resist
the slightest demonstration toward our craft.

As we boarded the canoe, the Islanders slowly retreated; meantime
earnestly conferring in whispers; all but the old priest, who, still
seated, presented an undaunted though troubled front. To our surprise,
he motioned us to sit down by him; which we did; taking care, however,
not to cut off our communication with Jarl.

With the hope of inspiring good will, I now unfolded a roll of printed
cotton, and spreading it before the priest, directed his attention to
the pictorial embellishments thereon, representing some hundreds of
sailor boys simultaneously ascending some hundreds of uniform sections
of a ship’s rigging. Glancing at them a moment, by a significant sign,
he gave me to know, that long previous he himself had ascended the
shrouds of a ship. Making this allusion, his countenance was overcast
with a ferocious expression, as if something terrific was connected
with the reminiscence. But it soon passed away, and somewhat abruptly
he assumed an air of much merriment.

While we were thus sitting together, and my whole soul full of the
thoughts of the captive, and how best to accomplish my purpose, and
often gazing toward the tent; I all at once noticed a movement among
the strangers. Almost in the same instant, Samoa, right across the face
of Aleema, and in his ordinary tones, bade me take heed to myself, for
mischief was brewing. Hardly was this warning uttered, when, with
carved clubs in their hands, the Islanders completely surrounded us.
Then up rose the old priest, and gave us to know, that we were wholly
in his power, and if we did not swear to depart in our boat forthwith,
and molest him no more, the peril be ours.

“Depart and you live; stay and you die.”

Fifteen to three. Madness to gainsay his mandate. Yet a beautiful
maiden was at stake.

The knife before dangling in Samoa’s ear was now in his hand. Jarl
cried out for us to regain the boat, several of the Islanders making a
rush for it. No time to think. All passed quicker than it can be said.
They closed in upon us, to push us from the canoe: Rudely the old
priest flung me from his side, menacing me with his dagger, the sharp
spine of a fish. A thrust and a threat! Ere I knew it, my cutlass made
a quick lunge. A curse from the priest’s mouth; red blood from his
side; he tottered, stared about him, and fell over like a brown hemlock
into the sea. A yell of maledictions rose on the air. A wild cry was
heard from the tent. Making a dead breach among the crowd, we now
dashed side by side for the boat. Springing into it, we found Jarl
battling with two Islanders; while the rest were still howling upon the
dais. Rage and grief had almost disabled them.

With one stroke of my cutlass, I now parted the line that held us to
the canoe, and with Samoa falling upon the two Islanders, by Jarl’s
help, we quickly mastered them; forcing them down into the bottom of
the boat.

The Skyeman and Samoa holding passive the captives, I quickly set our
sail, and snatching the sheet at the cavil, we rapidly shot from the
canoe. The strangers defying us with their spears; several couching
them as if to dart; while others held back their hands, as if to
prevent them from jeopardizing the lives of their countrymen in the
Chamois.

Seemingly untoward events oftentimes lead to successful results: Far
from destroying all chance of rescuing the captive, our temporary
flight, indispensable for the safety of Jarl, only made the success of
our enterprise more probable. For having made prisoners two of the
strangers, I determined to retain them as hostages, through whom to
effect my plans without further bloodshed.

And here it must needs be related, that some of the natives were
wounded in the fray: while all three of their assailants had received
several bruises.




CHAPTER XLII.
Remorse


During the skirmish not a single musket had been discharged. The first
snatched by Jarl had missed fire, and ere he could seize another, it
was close quarters with him, and no gestures to spare. His harpoon was
his all. And truly, there is nothing like steel in a fray. It comes and
it goes with a will, and is never a-weary. Your sword is your life, and
that of your foe; to keep or to take as it happens. Closer home does it
go than a rammer; and fighting with steel is a play without ever an
interlude. There are points more deadly than bullets; and stocks packed
full of subtle tubes, whence comes an impulse more reliable than
powder.

Binding our prisoners lengthwise across the boat’s seats, we rowed for
the canoe, making signs of amity.

Now, if there be any thing fitted to make a high tide ebb in the veins,
it is the sight of a vanquished foe, inferior to yourself in powers of
destruction; but whom some necessity has forced you to subdue. All
victories are not triumphs, nor all who conquer, heroes.

As we drew near the canoe, it was plain, that the loss of their sire
had again for the instant overcome the survivors. Raising hands, they
cursed us; and at intervals sent forth a low, piercing wail, peculiar
to their race. As before, faint cries were heard from the tent. And all
the while rose and fell on the sea, the ill-fated canoe.

As I gazed at this sight, what iron mace fell on my soul; what curse
rang sharp in my ear! It was I, who was the author of the deed that
caused the shrill wails that I heard. By this hand, the dead man had
died. Remorse smote me hard; and like lightning I asked myself, whether
the death-deed I had done was sprung of a virtuous motive, the rescuing
a captive from thrall; or whether beneath that pretense, I had engaged
in this fatal affray for some other, and selfish purpose; the
companionship of a beautiful maid. But throttling the thought, I swore
to be gay. Am I not rescuing the maiden? Let them go down who withstand
me.

At the dismal spectacle before him, Jarl, hitherto menacing our
prisoners with his weapon, in order to intimidate their countrymen,
honest Jarl dropped his harpoon. But shaking his knife in the air,
Samoa yet defied the strangers; nor could we prevent him. His
heathenish blood was up.

Standing foremost in the boat, I now assured the strangers, that all we
sought at their hands was the maiden in the tent. That captive
surrendered, our own, unharmed, should be restored. If not, they must
die. With a cry, they started to their feet, and brandished their
clubs; but, seeing Jarl’s harpoon quivering over the hearts of our
prisoners, they quickly retreated; at last signifying their
acquiescence in my demand. Upon this, I sprang to the dais, and across
it indicating a line near the bow, signed the Islanders to retire
beyond it. Then, calling upon them one by one to deliver their weapons,
they were passed into the boat.

The Chamois was now brought round to the canoe’s stern; and leaving
Jarl to defend it as before, the Upoluan rejoined me on the dais. By
these precautions—the hostages still remaining bound hand and foot in
the boat—we deemed ourselves entirely secure.

Attended by Samoa, I stood before the tent, now still as the grave.




CHAPTER XLIII.
The Tent Entered


By means of thin spaces between the braids of matting, the place was
open to the air, but not to view. There was also a round opening on one
side, only large enough, however, to admit the arm; but this aperture
was partially closed from within. In front, a deep-dyed rug of osiers,
covering the entrance way, was intricately laced to the standing part
of the tent. As I divided this lacing with my cutlass, there arose an
outburst of voices from the Islanders. And they covered their faces, as
the interior was revealed to my gaze.

Before me crouched a beautiful girl. Her hands were drooping. And, like
a saint from a shrine, she looked sadly out from her long, fair hair. A
low wail issued from her lips, and she trembled like a sound. There
were tears on her cheek, and a rose-colored pearl on her bosom.

Did I dream?—A snow-white skin: blue, firmament eyes: Golconda locks.
For an instant spell-bound I stood; while with a slow, apprehensive
movement, and still gazing fixedly, the captive gathered more closely
about her a gauze-like robe. Taking one step within, and partially
dropping the curtain of the tent, I so stood, as to have both sight and
speech of Samoa, who tarried without; while the maiden, crouching in
the farther corner of the retreat, was wholly screened from all eyes
but mine.

Crossing my hands before me, I now stood without speaking. For the soul
of me, I could not link this mysterious creature with the tawny
strangers. She seemed of another race. So powerful was this impression,
that unconsciously, I addressed her in my own tongue. She started, and
bending over, listened intently, as if to the first faint echo of
something dimly remembered. Again I spoke, when throwing back her hair,
the maiden looked up with a piercing, bewildered gaze. But her eyes
soon fell, and bending over once more, she resumed her former attitude.
At length she slowly chanted to herself several musical words, unlike
those of the Islanders; but though I knew not what they meant, they
vaguely seemed familiar.

Impatient to learn her story, I now questioned her in Polynesian. But
with much earnestness, she signed me to address her as before. Soon
perceiving, however, that without comprehending the meaning of the
words I employed, she seemed merely touched by something pleasing in
their sound, I once more addressed her in Polynesian; saying that I was
all eagerness to hear her history.

After much hesitation she complied; starting with alarm at every sound
from without; yet all the while deeply regarding me.

Broken as these disclosures were at the time, they are here presented
in the form in which they were afterward more fully narrated.

So unearthly was the story, that at first I little comprehended it; and
was almost persuaded that the luckless maiden was some beautiful
maniac.

She declared herself more than mortal, a maiden from Oroolia, the
Island of Delights, somewhere in the paradisiacal archipelago of the
Polynesians. To this isle, while yet an infant, by some mystical power,
she had been spirited from Amma, the place of her nativity. Her name
was Yillah. And hardly had the waters of Oroolia washed white her olive
skin, and tinged her hair with gold, when one day strolling in the
woodlands, she was snared in the tendrils of a vine. Drawing her into
its bowers, it gently transformed her into one of its blossoms, leaving
her conscious soul folded up in the transparent petals.

Here hung Yillah in a trance, the world without all tinged with the
rosy hue of her prison. At length when her spirit was about to burst
forth in the opening flower, the blossom was snapped from its stem; and
borne by a soft wind to the sea; where it fell into the opening valve
of a shell; which in good time was cast upon the beach of the Island of
Amma.

In a dream, these events were revealed to Aleema the priest; who by a
spell unlocking its pearly casket, took forth the bud, which now showed
signs of opening in the reviving air, and bore faint shadowy
revealings, as of the dawn behind crimson clouds. Suddenly expanding,
the blossom exhaled away in perfumes; floating a rosy mist in the air.
Condensing at last, there emerged from this mist the same radiant young
Yillah as before; her locks all moist, and a rose- colored pearl on her
bosom. Enshrined as a goddess, the wonderful child now tarried in the
sacred temple of Apo, buried in a dell; never beheld of mortal eyes
save Aleema’s.

Moon after moon passed away, and at last, only four days gone by,
Aleema came to her with a dream; that the spirits in Oroolia had
recalled her home by the way of Tedaidee, on whose coast gurgled up in
the sea an enchanted spring; which streaming over upon the brine,
flowed on between blue watery banks; and, plunging into a vortex, went
round and round, descending into depths unknown. Into this whirlpool
Yillah was to descend in a canoe, at last to well up in an inland
fountain of Oroolia.




CHAPTER XLIV.
Away!


Though clothed in language of my own, the maiden’s story is in
substance the same as she related. Yet were not these things narrated
as past events; she merely recounted them as impressions of her
childhood, and of her destiny yet unaccomplished. And mystical as the
tale most assuredly was, my knowledge of the strange arts of the island
priesthood, and the rapt fancies indulged in by many of their victims,
deprived it in good part of the effect it otherwise would have
produced.

For ulterior purposes connected with their sacerdotal supremacy, the
priests of these climes oftentimes secrete mere infants in their
temples; and jealously secluding them from all intercourse with the
world, craftily delude them, as they grow up, into the wildest
conceits.

Thus wrought upon, their pupils almost lose their humanity in the
constant indulgence of seraphic imaginings. In many cases becoming
inspired as oracles; and as such, they are sometimes resorted to by
devotees; always screened from view, however, in the recesses of the
temples. But in every instance, their end is certain. Beguiled with
some fairy tale about revisiting the islands of Paradise, they are led
to the secret sacrifice, and perish unknown to their kindred.

But, would that all this had been hidden from me at the time. For
Yillah was lovely enough to be really divine; and so I might have been
tranced into a belief of her mystical legends.

But with what passionate exultation did I find myself the deliverer of
this beautiful maiden; who, thinking no harm, and rapt in a dream, was
being borne to her fate on the coast of Tedaidee. Nor now, for a
moment, did the death of Aleema her guardian seem to hang heavy upon my
heart. I rejoiced that I had sent him to his gods; that in place of the
sea moss growing over sweet Yillah drowned in the sea, the vile priest
himself had sunk to the bottom.

But though he had sunk in the deep, his ghost sunk not in the deep
waters of my soul. However in exultations its surface foamed up, at
bottom guilt brooded. Sifted out, my motives to this enterprise
justified not the mad deed, which, in a moment of rage, I had done:
though, those motives had been covered with a gracious pretense;
concealing myself from myself. But I beat down the thought.

In relating her story, the maiden frequently interrupted it with
questions concerning myself:—Whence I came: being white, from Oroolia?
Whither I was going: to Amma? And what had happened to Aleema? For she
had been dismayed at the fray, though knowing not what it could mean;
and she had heard the priest’s name called upon in lamentations. These
questions for the time I endeavored to evade; only inducing her to
fancy me some gentle demigod, that had come over the sea from her own
fabulous Oroolia. And all this she must verily have believed. For whom,
like me, ere this could she have beheld? Still fixed she her eyes upon
me strangely, and hung upon the accents of my voice.

While this scene was passing, the strangers began to show signs of
impatience, and a voice from the Chamois repeatedly hailed us to
accelerate our movements.

My course was quickly decided. The only obstacle to be encountered was
the possibility of Yillah’s alarm at being suddenly borne into my prow.
For this event I now sought to prepare her. I informed the damsel that
Aleema had been dispatched on a long errand to Oroolia; leaving to my
care, for the present, the guardianship of the lovely Yillah; and that
therefore, it was necessary to carry her tent into my own canoe, then
waiting to receive it.

This intelligence she received with the utmost concern; and not knowing
to what her perplexity might lead, I thought fit to transport her into
the Chamois, while yet overwhelmed by the announcement of my intention.

Quitting her retreat, I apprised Jarl of my design; and then, no more
delay!

At bottom, the tent was attached to a light framework of bamboos; and
from its upper corners, four cords, like those of a marquee, confined
it to the dais. These, Samoa’s knife soon parted; when lifting the
light tent, we speedily transferred it to the Chamois; a wild yell
going up from the Islanders, which drowned the faint cries of the
maiden. But we heeded not the din. Toss in the fruit, hanging from the
altar-prow! It was done; and then running up our sail, we glided
away;—Chamois, tent, hostages, and all. Rushing to the now vacant stern
of their canoe, the Islanders once more lifted up their hands and their
voices in curses.

A suitable distance gained, we paused to fling overboard the arms we
had taken; and Jarl proceeded to liberate the hostages.

Meanwhile, I entered the tent, and by many tokens, sought to allay the
maiden’s alarm. Thus engaged, violent plunges were heard: our prisoners
taking to the sea to regain their canoe. All dripping, they were
received by their brethren with wild caresses.

From something now said by the captives, the rest seemed suddenly
inspirited with hopes of revenge; again wildly shaking their spears,
just before picked up from the sea. With great clamor and confusion
they soon set their mat-sail; and instead of sailing southward for
Tedaidee, or northward for Amma their home, they steered straight after
us, in our wake.

Foremost in the prow stood three; javelins poised for a dart; at
intervals, raising a yell.

Did they mean to pursue me? Full in my rear they came on, baying like
hounds on their game. Yillah trembled at their cries. My own heart beat
hard with undefinable dread. The corpse of Aleema seemed floating
before: its avengers were raging behind.

But soon these phantoms departed. For very soon it appeared that in
vain the pagans pursued. Their craft, our fleet Chamois outleaped. And
farther and farther astern dropped the evil-boding canoe, till at last
but a speck; when a great swell of the sea surged up before it, and it
was seen no more. Samoa swore that it must have swamped, and gone down.
But however it was, my heart lightened apace. I saw none but ourselves
on the sea: I remembered that our keel left no track as it sailed.

Let the Oregon Indian through brush, bramble, and brier, hunt his
enemy’s trail, far over the mountains and down in the vales; comes he
to the water, he snuffs idly in air.




CHAPTER XLV.
Reminiscences


In resecuing the gentle Yillah from the hands of the Islanders, a
design seemed accomplished. But what was now to be done? Here, in our
adventurous Chamois, was a damsel more lovely than the flushes of
morning; and for companions, whom had she but me and my comrades?
Besides, her bosom still throbbed with alarms, her fancies all roving
through mazes.

How subdue these dangerous imaginings? How gently dispel them?

But one way there was: to lead her thoughts toward me, as her friend
and preserver; and a better and wiser than Aleema the priest. Yet could
not this be effected but by still maintaining my assumption of a divine
origin in the blessed isle of Oroolia; and thus fostering in her heart
the mysterious interest, with which from the first she had regarded me.
But if punctilious reserve on the part of her deliverer should teach
her to regard him as some frigid stranger from the Arctic Zone, what
sympathy could she have for him? and hence, what peace of mind, having
no one else to cling to?

Now re-entering the tent, she again inquired where tarried Aleema.

“Think not of him, sweet Yillah,” I cried. “Look on me. Am I not white
like yourself? Behold, though since quitting Oroolia the sun has dyed
my cheek, am I not even as you? Am I brown like the dusky Aleema? They
snatched you away from your isle in the sea, too early for you to
remember me there. But you have not been forgotten by me, sweetest
Yillah. Ha! ha! shook we not the palm-trees together, and chased we not
the rolling nuts down the glen? Did we not dive into the grotto on the
sea-shore, and come up together in the cool cavern in the hill? In my
home in Oroolia, dear Yillah, I have a lock of your hair, ere yet it
was golden: a little dark tress like a ring. How your cheeks were then
changing from olive to white. And when shall I forget the hour, that I
came upon you sleeping among the flowers, with roses and lilies for
cheeks. Still forgetful? Know you not my voice? Those little spirits in
your eyes have seen me before. They mimic me now as they sport in their
lakes. All the past a dim blank? Think of the time when we ran up and
down in our arbor, where the green vines grew over the great ribs of
the stranded whale. Oh Yillah, little Yillah, has it all come to this?
am I forever forgotten? Yet over the wide watery world have I sought
thee: from isle to isle, from sea to sea. And now we part not. Aleema
is gone. My prow shall keep kissing the waves, till it kisses the beach
at Oroolia. Yillah, look up.”

Sunk the ghost of Aleema: Sweet Yillah was mine!




CHAPTER XLVI.
The Chamois With A Roving Commission


Through the assiduity of my Viking, ere nightfall our Chamois was again
in good order. And with many subtle and seamanlike splices the light
tent was lashed in its place; the sail taken up by a reef.

My comrades now questioned me, as to my purposes; whether they had been
modified by the events of the day. I replied that our destination was
still the islands to the westward.

But from these we had steadily been drifting all the morning long; so
that now no loom of the land was visible. But our prow was kept
pointing as before.

As evening came on, my comrades fell fast asleep, leaving me at the
helm.

How soft and how dreamy the light of the hour. The rays of the sun,
setting behind golden-barred clouds, came to me like the gleaming of a
shaded light behind a lattice. And the low breeze, pervaded with the
peculiar balm of the mid-Pacific near land, was fragrant as the breath
of a bride.

Such was the scene; so still and witching that the hand of Yillah in
mine seemed no hand, but a touch. Visions flitted before me and in me;
something hummed in my ear; all the air was a lay.

And now entered a thought into my heart. I reflected how serenely we
might thus glide along, far removed from all care and anxiety. And
then, what different scenes might await us upon any of the shores
roundabout. But there seemed no danger in the balmy sea; the assured
vicinity of land imparting a sense of security. We had ample supplies
for several days more, and thanks to the Pagan canoe, an abundance of
fruit.

Besides, what cared I now for the green groves and bright shore? Was
not Yillah my shore and my grove? my meadow, my mead, my soft shady
vine, and my arbor? Of all things desirable and delightful, the full-
plumed sheaf, and my own right arm the band? Enough: no shore for me
yet. One sweep of the helm, and our light prow headed round toward the
vague land of song, sun, and vine: the fabled South.

As we glided along, strange Yillah gazed down in the sea, and would
fain have had me plunge into it with her, to rove through its depths.
But I started dismayed; in fancy, I saw the stark body of the priest
drifting by. Again that phantom obtruded; again guilt laid his red hand
on my soul. But I laughed. Was not Yillah my own? by my arm rescued
from ill? To do her a good, I had periled myself. So down, down,
Aleema.

When next morning, starting from slumber, my comrades beheld the sun on
our beam, instead of astern as before at that hour, they eagerly
inquired, “Whither now?” But very briefly I gave them to know, that
after devoting the night to the due consideration of a matter so
important, I had determined upon voyaging for the island Tedaidee, in
place of the land to the westward.

At this, they were not displeased. But to tell the plain truth, I
harbored some shadowy purpose of merely hovering about for a while,
till I felt more landwardly inclined.

But had I not declared to Yillah, that our destination was the fairy
isle she spoke of, even Oroolia? Yet that shore was so exceedingly
remote, and the folly of endeavoring to reach it in a craft built with
hands, so very apparent, that what wonder I really nourished no thought
of it?

So away floated the Chamois, like a vagrant cloud in the heavens:
bound, no one knew whither.




CHAPTER XLVII.
Yillah, Jarl, And Samoa


But time to tell, how Samoa and Jarl regarded this mystical Yillah; and
how Yillah regarded them.

As Beauty from the Beast, so at first shrank the damsel from my one-
armed companion. But seeing my confidence in the savage, a reaction
soon followed. And in accordance with that curious law, by which, under
certain conditions, the ugliest mortals become only amiably hideous,
Yillah at length came to look upon Samoa as a sort of harmless and
good-natured goblin. Whence came he, she cared not; or what was his
history; or in what manner his fortunes were united to mine.

May be, she held him a being of spontaneous origin.

Now, as every where women are the tamers of the menageries of men; so
Yillah in good time tamed down Samoa to the relinquishment of that
horrible thing in his ear, and persuaded him to substitute a vacancy
for the bauble in his nose. On his part, however, all this was
conditional. He stipulated for the privilege of restoring both trinkets
upon suitable occasions.

But if thus gayly the damsel sported with Samoa; how different his
emotions toward her? The fate to which she had been destined, and every
nameless thing about her, appealed to all his native superstitions,
which ascribed to beings of her complexion a more than terrestrial
origin. When permitted to approach her, he looked timid and awkwardly
strange; suggesting the likeness of some clumsy satyr, drawing in his
horns; slowly wagging his tail; crouching abashed before some radiant
spirit.

And this reverence of his was most pleasing to me, Bravo! thought I; be
a pagan forever. No more than myself; for, after a different fashion,
Yillah was an idol to both.

But what of my Viking? Why, of good Jarl I grieve to say, that the
old-fashioned interest he took in my affairs led him to look upon
Yillah as a sort of intruder, an Ammonite syren, who might lead me
astray. This would now and then provoke a phillipic; but he would only
turn toward my resentment his devotion; and then I was silent.

Unsophisticated as a wild flower in the germ, Yillah seemed incapable
of perceiving the contrasted lights in which she was regarded by our
companions. And like a true beauty seemed to cherish the presumption,
that it was quite impossible for such a person as hers to prove
otherwise than irresistible to all.

She betrayed much surprise at my Vikings appearance. But most of all
was she struck by a characteristic device upon the arm of the wonderful
mariner—our Saviour on the cross, in blue; with the crown of thorns,
and three drops of blood in vermilion, falling one by one from each
hand and foot.

Now, honest Jarl did vastly pride himself upon this ornament. It was
the only piece of vanity about him. And like a lady keeping gloveless
her hand to show off a fine Turquoise ring, he invariably wore that
sleeve of his frock rolled up, the better to display the embellishment.

And round and round would Yillah turn Jarl’s arm, till Jarl was fain to
stand firm, for fear of revolving all over. How such untutored homage
would have thrilled the heart of the ingenious artist!

Eventually, through the Upoluan, she made overtures to the Skyeman,
concerning the possession of his picture in her own proper right. In
her very simplicity, little heeding, that like a landscape in fresco,
it could not be removed.




CHAPTER XLVIII.
Something Under The Surface


Not to omit an occurrence of considerable interest, we must needs here
present some account of a curious retinue of fish which overtook our
Chamois, a day or two after parting with the canoe.

A violent creaming and frothing in our rear announced their approach.
Soon we found ourselves the nucleus of an incredible multitude of finny
creatures, mostly anonymous.

First, far in advance of our prow, swam the helmeted Silver-heads; side
by side, in uniform ranks, like an army. Then came the Boneetas, with
their flashing blue flanks. Then, like a third distinct regiment,
wormed and twisted through the water like Archimedean screws, the
quivering Wriggle-tails; followed in turn by the rank and file of the
Trigger-fish—so called from their quaint dorsal fins being set in their
backs with a comical curve, as if at half-cock. Far astern the rear was
brought up by endless battalions of Yellow- backs, right martially
vested in buff.

And slow sailing overhead were flights of birds; a wing in the air for
every fin in the sea.

But let the sea-fowls fly on: turn we to the fish.

Their numbers were amazing; countless as the tears shed for perfidious
lovers. Far abroad on both flanks, they swam in long lines, tier above
tier; the water alive with their hosts. Locusts of the sea,
peradventure, going to fall with a blight upon some green, mossy
province of Neptune. And tame and fearless they were, as the first fish
that swam in Euphrates; hardly evading the hand; insomuch that Samoa
caught many without lure or line.

They formed a decorous escort; paddling along by our barnacled sides,
as if they had been with us from the very beginning; neither scared by
our craft’s surging in the water; nor in the least sympathetic at
losing a comrade by the hand of Samoa. They closed in their ranks and
swam on.

How innocent, yet heartless they looked! Had a plank dropped out of our
boat, we had sunk to the bottom; and belike, our cheerful retinue would
have paid the last rites to our remains.

But still we kept company; as sociably as you please; Samoa helping
himself when he listed, and Yillah clapping her hands as the radiant
creatures, by a simultaneous turning round on their silvery bellies,
caused the whole sea to glow like a burnished shield.

But what has befallen this poor little Boneeta astern, that he swims so
toilingly on, with gills showing purple? What has he there, towing
behind? It is tangled sea-kelp clinging to its fins. But the clogged
thing strains to keep up with its fellows. Yet little they heed. Away
they go; every fish for itself, and any fish for Samoa.

At last the poor Boneeta is seen no more. The myriad fins swim on; a
lonely waste, where the lost one drops behind.

Strange fish! All the live-long day, they were there by our side; and
at night still tarried and shone; more crystal and scaly in the pale
moonbeams, than in the golden glare of the sun.

How prettily they swim; all silver life; darting hither and thither
between their long ranks, and touching their noses, and scraping
acquaintance. No mourning they wear for the Boneeta left far astern;
nor for those so cruelly killed by Samoa. No, no; all is glee, fishy
glee, and frolicking fun; light hearts and light fins; gay backs and
gay spirits.—Swim away, swim away! my merry fins all. Let us roam the
flood; let us follow this monster fish with the barnacled sides; this
strange-looking fish, so high out of water; that goes without fins.
What fish can it be? What rippling is that? Dost hear the great monster
breathe? Why, ’tis sharp at both ends; a tail either way; nor eyes has
it any, nor mouth. What a curious fish! what a comical fish! But more
comical far, those creatures above, on its hollow back, clinging
thereto like the snaky eels, that cling and slide on the back of the
Sword fish, our terrible foe. But what curious eels these are! Do they
deem themselves pretty as we? No, no; for sure, they behold our limber
fins, our speckled and beautiful scales. Poor, powerless things! How
they must wish they were we, that roam the flood, and scour the seas
with a wish. Swim away; merry fins, swim away! Let him drop, that
fellow that halts; make a lane; close in, and fill up. Let him drown,
if he can not keep pace. No laggards for us:—

We fish, we fish, we merrily swim,
We care not for friend nor for foe:
    Our fins are stout,
    Our tails are out,
As through the seas we go.

Fish, Fish, we are fish with red gills;
    Naught disturbs us, our blood is at zero:
We are buoyant because of our bags,
    Being many, each fish is a hero.
We care not what is it, this life
    That we follow, this phantom unknown:
To swim, it’s exceedingly pleasant,—
    So swim away, making a foam.
This strange looking thing by our side,
    Not for safety, around it we flee:—
Its shadow’s so shady, that’s all,—
    We only swim under its lee.
And as for the eels there above,
    And as for the fowls in the air,
We care not for them nor their ways,
    As we cheerily glide afar!

We fish, we fish, we merrily swim,
We care not for friend nor for foe:
    Our fins are stout,
    Our tails are out,
As through the seas we go.


But how now, my fine fish! what alarms your long ranks, and tosses them
all into a hubbub of scales and of foam? Never mind that long knave
with the spear there, astern. Pipe away, merry fish, and give us a
stave or two more, keeping time with your doggerel tails. But no, no!
their singing was over. Grim death, in the shape of a Chevalier, was
after them.

How they changed their boastful tune! How they hugged the vilified
boat! How they wished they were in it, the braggarts! And how they all
tingled with fear!

For, now here, now there, is heard a terrific rushing sound under
water, betokening the onslaught of the dread fish of prey, that with
spear ever in rest, charges in upon the out-skirts of the shoal,
transfixing the fish on his weapon. Re-treating and shaking them off,
the Chevalier devours them; then returns to the charge.

Hugging the boat to desperation, the poor fish fairly crowded
themselves up to the surface, and floundered upon each other, as men
are lifted off their feet in a mob. They clung to us thus, out of a
fancied security in our presence. Knowing this, we felt no little alarm
for ourselves, dreading lest the Chevalier might despise our boat, full
as much as his prey; and in pursuing the fish, run through the poor
Chamois with a lunge. A jacket, rolled up, was kept in readiness to be
thrust into the first opening made; while as the thousand fins audibly
patted against our slender planks, we felt nervously enough; as if
treading upon thin, crackling ice.

At length, to our no small delight, the enemy swam away; and again by
our side merrily paddled our escort; ten times merrier than ever.




CHAPTER XLIX.
Yillah


While for a few days, now this way, now that, as our craft glides
along, surrounded by these locusts of the deep, let the story of Yillah
flow on.

Of her beauty say I nothing. It was that of a crystal lake in a
fathomless wood: all light and shade; full of fleeting revealings; now
shadowed in depths; now sunny in dimples; but all sparkling and
shifting, and blending together.

But her wild beauty was a vail to things still more strange. As often
she gazed so earnestly into my eyes, like some pure spirit looking far
down into my soul, and seeing therein some upturned faces, I started in
amaze, and asked what spell was on me, that thus she gazed.

Often she entreated me to repeat over and over again certain syllables
of my language. These she would chant to herself, pausing now and then,
as if striving to discover wherein lay their charm.

In her accent, there was something very different from that of the
people of the canoe. Wherein lay the difference. I knew not; but it
enabled her to pronounce with readiness all the words which I taught
her; even as if recalling sounds long forgotten.

If all this filled me with wonder, how much was that wonder increased,
and yet baffled again, by considering her complexion, and the cast of
her features.

After endeavoring in various ways to account for these things, I was
led to imagine, that the damsel must be an Albino (Tulla) occasionally
to be met with among the people of the Pacific. These persons are of an
exceedingly delicate white skin, tinted with a faint rose hue, like the
lips of a shell. Their hair is golden. But, unlike the Albinos of other
climes, their eyes are invariably blue, and no way intolerant of light.

As a race, the Tullas die early. And hence the belief, that they
pertain to some distant sphere, and only through irregularities in the
providence of the gods, come to make their appearance upon earth:
whence, the oversight discovered, they are hastily snatched. And it is
chiefly on this account, that in those islands where human sacrifices
are offered, the Tullas are deemed the most suitable oblations for the
altar, to which from their birth many are prospectively devoted. It was
these considerations, united to others, which at times induced me to
fancy, that by the priest, Yillah was regarded as one of these beings.
So mystical, however, her revelations concerning her past history, that
often I knew not what to divine. But plainly they showed that she had
not the remotest conception of her real origin.

But these conceits of a state of being anterior to an earthly existence
may have originated in one of those celestial visions seen
transparently stealing over the face of a slumbering child. And
craftily drawn forth and re-echoed by another, and at times repeated
over to her with many additions, these imaginings must at length have
assumed in her mind a hue of reality, heightened into conviction by the
dreamy seclusion of her life.

But now, let her subsequent and more credible history be related, as
from time to time she rehearsed it.




CHAPTER L.
Yillah In Ardair


In the verdant glen of Ardair, far in the silent interior of Amma, shut
in by hoar old cliffs, Yillah the maiden abode.

So small and so deep was this glen, so surrounded on all sides by steep
acclivities, and so vividly green its verdure, and deceptive the
shadows that played there; that, from above, it seemed more like a lake
of cool, balmy air, than a glen: its woodlands and grasses gleaming
shadowy all, like sea groves and mosses beneath the calm sea.

Here, none came but Aleema the priest, who at times was absent for days
together. But at certain seasons, an unseen multitude with loud chants
stood upon the verge of the neighboring precipices, and traversing
those shaded wilds, slowly retreated; their voices lessening and
lessening, as they wended their way through the more distant groves.

At other times, Yillah being immured in the temple of Apo, a band of
men entering the vale, surrounded her retreat, dancing there till
evening came. Meanwhile, heaps of fruit, garlands of flowers, and
baskets of fish, were laid upon an altar without, where stood Aleema,
arrayed in white tappa, and muttering to himself, as the offerings were
laid at his feet.

When Aleema was gone, Yillah went forth into the glen, and wandered
among the trees, and reposed by the banks of the stream. And ever as
she strolled, looked down upon her the grim old cliffs, bearded with
trailing moss.

Toward the lower end of the vale, its lofty walls advancing and
overhanging their base, almost met in mid air. And a great rock, hurled
from an adjacent height, and falling into the space intercepted, there
remained fixed. Aerial trees shot up from its surface; birds nested in
its clefts; and strange vines roved abroad, overrunning the tops of the
trees, lying thereon in coils and undulations, like anacondas basking
in the light. Beneath this rock, was a lofty wall of ponderous stones.
Between its crevices, peeps were had of a long and leafy arcade,
quivering far away to where the sea rolled in the sun. Lower down,
these crevices gave an outlet to the waters of the brook, which, in a
long cascade, poured over sloping green ledges near the foot of the
wall, into a deep shady pool; whose rocky sides, by the perpetual
eddying of the water, had been worn into a grotesque resemblance to a
group of giants, with heads submerged, indolently reclining about the
basin.

In this pool, Yillah would bathe. And once, emerging, she heard the
echoes of a voice, and called aloud. But the only reply, was the
rustling of branches, as some one, invisible, fled down the valley
beyond. Soon after, a stone rolled inward, and Aleema the priest stood
before her; saying that the voice she had heard was his. But it was
not.

At last the weary days grew, longer and longer, and the maiden pined
for companionship. When the breeze blew not, but slept in the caves of
the mountains, and all the leaves of the trees stood motionless as
tears in the eye, Yillah would sadden, and call upon the spirits in her
soul to awaken. She sang low airs, she thought she had heard in
Oroolia; but started affrighted, as from dingles and dells, came back
to her strains more wild than hers. And ever, when sad, Aleema would
seek to cheer her soul, by calling to mind the bright scenes of Oroolia
the Blest, to which place, he averred, she was shortly to return, never
more to depart.

Now, at the head of the vale of Ardair, rose a tall, dark peak,
presenting at the top the grim profile of a human face; whose shadow,
every afternoon, crept down the verdant side of the mountain: a silent
phantom, stealing all over the bosom of the glen.

At times, when the phantom drew near, Aleema would take Yillah forth,
and waiting its approach, lay her down by the shadow, disposing her
arms in a caress; saying, “Oh, Apo! dost accept thy bride?” And at
last, when it crept beyond the place where he stood, and buried the
whole valley in gloom; Aleema would say, “Arise Yillah; Apo hath
stretched himself to sleep in Ardair. Go, slumber where thou wilt; for
thou wilt slumber in his arms.”

And so, every night, slept the maiden in the arms of grim Apo.

One day when Yillah had come to love the wild shadow, as something that
every day moved before her eyes, where all was so deathfully still; she
went forth alone to watch it, as softly it slid down from the peak. Of
a sudden, when its face was just edging a chasm, that made it to look
as if parting its lips, she heard a loud voice, and thought it was Apo
calling “Yillah! Yillah!” But now it seemed like the voice she had
heard while bathing in the pool. Glancing upward, she beheld a
beautiful open-armed youth, gazing down upon her from an inaccessible
crag. But presently, there was a rustling in the groves behind, and
swift as thought, something darted through the air. The youth bounded
forward. Yillah opened her arms to receive him; but he fell upon the
cliff, and was seen no more. As alarmed, and in tears, she fled from
the scene, some one out of sight ran before her through the wood.

Upon recounting this adventure to Aleema, he said, that the being she
had seen, must have been a bad spirit come to molest her; and that Apo
had slain him.

The sight of this youth, filled Yillah with wild yearnings to escape
from her lonely retreat; for a glimpse of some one beside the priest
and the phantom, suggested vague thoughts of worlds of fair beings, in
regions beyond Ardair. But Aleema sought to put away these conceits;
saying, that ere long she would be journeying to Oroolia, there to
rejoin the spirits she dimly remembered.

Soon after, he came to her with a shell—one of those ever moaning of
ocean—and placing it to her ear, bade her list to the being within,
which in that little shell had voyaged from Oroolia to bear her company
in Amma.

Now, the maiden oft held it to her ear, and closing her eyes, listened
and listened to its soft inner breathings, till visions were born of
the sound, and her soul lay for hours in a trance of delight.

And again the priest came, and brought her a milk-white bird, with a
bill jet-black, and eyes like stars. “In this, lurks the soul of a
maiden; it hath flown from Oroolia to greet you.” The soft stranger
willingly nestled in her bosom; turning its bright eyes upon hers, and
softly warbling.

Many days passed; and Yillah, the bird, and the shell were inseparable.
The bird grew familiar; pecked seeds from her mouth; perched upon her
shoulder, and sang in her ear; and at night, folded its wings in her
bosom, and, like a sea-fowl, went softly to sleep: rising and falling
upon the maiden’s heart. And every morning it flew from its nest, and
fluttered and chirped; and sailed to and fro; and blithely sang; and
brushed Yillah’s cheek till she woke. Then came to her hand: and
Yillah, looking earnestly in its eyes, saw strange faces there; and
said to herself as she gazed—“These are two souls, not one.”

But at last, going forth into the groves with the bird, it suddenly
flew from her side, and perched in a bough; and throwing back its white
downy throat, there gushed from its bill a clear warbling jet, like a
little fountain in air. Now the song ceased; when up and away toward
the head of the vale, flew the bird. “Lil! Lil! come back, leave me
not, blest souls of the maidens.” But on flew the bird, far up a
defile, winging its way till a speck.

It was shortly after this, and upon the evening of a day which had been
tumultuous with sounds of warfare beyond the lower wall of the glen;
that Aleema came to Yillah in alarm; saying—“Yillah, the time has come
to follow thy bird; come, return to thy home in Oroolia.” And he told
her the way she would voyage there: by the vortex on the coast of
Tedaidee. That night, being veiled and placed in the tent, the maiden
was borne to the sea-side, where the canoe was in waiting. And setting
sail quickly, by next morning the island of Amma was no longer in
sight.

And this was the voyage, whose sequel has already been recounted.




CHAPTER LI.
The Dream Begins To Fade


Stripped of the strange associations, with which a mind like Yillah’s
must have invested every incident of her life, the story of her abode
in Ardair seemed not incredible.

But so etherealized had she become from the wild conceits she
nourished, that she verily believed herself a being of the lands of
dreams. Her fabulous past was her present.

Yet as our intimacy grew closer and closer, these fancies seemed to be
losing their hold. And often she questioned me concerning my own
reminiscences of her shadowy isle. And cautiously I sought to produce
the impression, that whatever I had said of that clime, had been
revealed to me in dreams; but that in these dreams, her own lineaments
had smiled upon me; and hence the impulse which had sent me roving
after the substance of this spiritual image.

And true it was to say so; and right it was to swear it, upon her white
arms crossed. For oh, Yillah; were you not the earthly semblance of
that sweet vision, that haunted my earliest thoughts?

At first she had wildly believed, that the nameless affinities between
us, were owing to our having in times gone by dwelt together in the
same ethereal region. But thoughts like these were fast dying out. Yet
not without many strange scrutinies. More intently than ever she gazed
into my eyes; rested her ear against my heart, and listened to its
beatings. And love, which in the eye of its object ever seeks to invest
itself with some rare superiority, love, sometimes induced me to prop
my failing divinity; though it was I myself who had undermined it.

But if it was with many regrets, that in the sight of Yillah, I
perceived myself thus dwarfing down to a mortal; it was with quite
contrary emotions, that I contemplated the extinguishment in her heart
of the notion of her own spirituality. For as such thoughts were chased
away, she clung the more closely to me, as unto one without whom she
would be desolate indeed.

And now, at intervals, she was sad, and often gazed long and fixedly
into the sea. Nor would she say why it was, that she did so; until at
length she yielded; and replied, that whatever false things Aleema
might have instilled into her mind; of this much she was certain: that
the whirlpool on the coast of Tedaidee prefigured her fate; that in the
waters she saw lustrous eyes, and beckoning phantoms, and strange
shapes smoothing her a couch among the mosses.

Her dreams seemed mine. Many visions I had of the green corse of the
priest, outstretching its arms in the water, to receive pale Yillah, as
she sunk in the sea.

But these forebodings departed, no happiness in the universe like ours.
We lived and we loved; life and love were united; in gladness glided
our days.




CHAPTER LII.
World Ho!


Five suns rose and set. And Yillah pining for the shore, we turned our
prow due west, and next morning came in sight of land.

It was innumerable islands; lifting themselves bluely through the azure
air, and looking upon the distant sea, like haycocks in a hazy field.
Towering above all, and mid-most, rose a mighty peak; one fleecy cloud
sloping against its summit; a column wreathed. Beyond, like purple
steeps in heaven at set of sun, stretched far away, what seemed lands
on lands, in infinite perspective.

Gliding on, the islands grew more distinct; rising up from the billows
to greet us; revealing hills, vales, and peaks, grouped within a
milk-white zone of reef, so vast, that in the distance all was dim. The
jeweled vapors, ere-while hovering over these violet shores, now seemed
to be shedding their gems; and as the almost level rays of the sun,
shooting through the air like a variegated prism, touched the verdant
land, it trembled all over with dewy sparkles.

Still nearer we came: our sail faintly distended as the breeze died
away from our vicinity to the isles. The billows rolled listlessly by,
as if conscious that their long task was nigh done; while gleamed the
white reef, like the trail of a great fish in a calm. But as yet, no
sign of paddle or canoe; no distant smoke; no shining thatch. Bravo!
good comrades, we’ve discovered some new constellation in the sea.

Sweet Yillah, no more of Oroolia; see you not this flowery land?
Nevermore shall we desire to roam.

Voyaging along the zone, we came to an opening; and quitting the
firmament blue of the open sea, we glided in upon the still, green
waters of the wide lagoon. Mapped out in the broad shadows of the
isles, and tinted here and there with the reflected hues of the sun
clouds, the mild waters stretched all around us like another sky. Near
by the break in the reef, was a little island, with palm trees harping
in the breeze; an aviary of alluring sounds, that seemed calling upon
us to land. And here, Yillah, whom the sight of the verdure had made
glad, threw out a merry suggestion. Nothing less, than to plant our
mast, sail-set, upon the highest hill; and fly away, island and all;
trees rocking, birds caroling, flowers springing; away, away, across
the wide waters, to Oroolia! But alas! how weigh the isle’s coral
anchor, leagues down in the fathomless sea?

We glanced around; but all the islands seemed slumbering in the
flooding light.

“A canoe! a canoe!” cried Samoa, as three proas showed themselves
rounding a neighboring shore. Instantly we sailed for them; but after
shooting to and fro for a time, and standing up and gazing at us, the
Islanders retreated behind the headland. Hardly were they out of sight,
when from many a shore roundabout, other proas pushed off. Soon the
water all round us was enlivened by fleets of canoes, darting hither
and thither like frighted water-fowls. Presently they all made for one
island.

From their actions we argued that these people could have had but
little or no intercourse with whites; and most probably knew not how to
account for our appearance among them. Desirous, therefore, of a
friendly meeting, ere any hostile suspicions might arise, we pointed
our craft for the island, whither all the canoes were now hastening.
Whereupon, those which had not yet reached their destination, turned
and fled; while the occupants of the proas that had landed, ran into
the groves, and were lost to view.

Crossing the distinct outer line of the isle’s shadow on the water, we
gained the shore; and gliding along its margin, passing canoe after
canoe, hauled up on the silent beach, which otherwise seemed entirely
innocent of man.

A dilemma. But I decided at last upon disembarking Jarl and Samoa, to
seek out and conciliate the natives. So, landing them upon a jutting
buttress of coral, whence they waded to the shore; I pushed off with
Yillah into the water beyond, to await the event.

Full an hour must have elapsed; when, to our great joy, loud shouts
were heard; and there burst into view a tumultuous crowd, in the midst
of which my Viking was descried, mounted upon the shoulders of two
brawny natives; while the Upoluan, striding on in advance, seemed
resisting a similar attempt to elevate him in the world.

Good omens both.

“Come ashore!” cried Jarl. “Aramai!” cried Samoa; while storms of
interjections went up from the Islanders who with extravagant gestures
danced about the beach.

Further caution seemed needless: I pointed our prow for the shore. No
sooner was this perceived, than, raising an applauding shout, the
Islanders ran up to their waists in the sea. And skimming like a gull
over the smooth lagoon, the light shallop darted in among them. Quick
as thought, fifty hands were on the gunwale: and, with all its
contents, lifted bodily into the air, the little Chamois, upon many a
dripping shoulder, was borne deep into the groves. Yillah shrieked at
the rocking motion, and when the boughs of the trees brushed against
the tent.

With his staff, an old man now pointed to a couple of twin-like trees,
some four paces apart; and a little way from the ground conveniently
crotched.

And here, eftsoons, they deposited their burden; lowering the Chamois
gently between the forks of the trees, whose willow-like foliage
fringed the tent and its inmate.




CHAPTER LIII.
The Chamois Ashore


Until now, enveloped in her robe, and crouching like a fawn, Yillah had
been well nigh hidden from view. But presently she withdrew her hood.

What saw the Islanders, that they so gazed and adored in silence: some
retreating, some creeping nearer, and the women all in a flutter? Long
they gazed; and following Samoa’s example, stretched forth their arms
in reverence.

The adoration of the maiden was extended to myself. Indeed, from the
singular gestures employed, I had all along suspected, that we were
being received with unwonted honors.

I now sought to get speech of my comrades. But so obstreperous was the
crowd, that it was next to impossible. Jarl was still in his perch in
the air; his enthusiastic bearers not yet suffering him to alight.
Samoa, however, who had managed to keep out of the saddle, by-and-by
contrived to draw nearer to the Chamois.

He advised me, by no means to descend for the present; since in any
event we were sure of remaining unmolested therein; the Islanders
regarding it as sacred.

The Upoluan attracted a great deal of attention; chiefly from his style
of tattooing, which, together with other peculiarities, so interested
the natives, that they were perpetually hanging about him, putting
eager questions, and all the time keeping up a violent clamor.

But despite the large demand upon his lungs, Samoa made out to inform
me, that notwithstanding the multitude assembled, there was no high
chief, or person of consequence present; the king of the place, also
those of the islands adjacent, being absent at a festival in another
quarter of the Archipelago. But upon the first distant glimpse of the
Chamois, fleet canoes had been dispatched to announce the surprising
event that had happened.

In good time, the crowd becoming less tumultuous, and abandoning the
siege of Samoa, I availed myself of this welcome lull, and called upon
him and my Viking to enter the Chamois; desirous of condensing our
forces against all emergencies.

Samoa now gave me to understand, that from all he could learn, the
Islanders regarded me as a superior being. They had inquired of him,
whether I was not white Taji, a sort of half-and-half deity, now and
then an Avatar among them, and ranking among their inferior ex- officio
demi-gods. To this, Samoa had said ay; adding, moreover, all he could
to encourage the idea.

He now entreated me, at the first opportunity, to announce myself as
Taji: declaring that if once received under that title, the unbounded
hospitality of our final reception would be certain; and our persons
fenced about from all harm.

Encouraging this. But it was best to be wary. For although among some
barbarians the first strangers landing upon their shores, are
frequently hailed as divine; and in more than one wild land have been
actually styled gods, as a familiar designation; yet this has not
exempted the celestial visitants from peril, when too much presuming
upon the reception extended to them. In sudden tumults they have been
slain outright, and while full faith in their divinity had in no wise
abated. The sad fate of an eminent navigator is a well-known
illustration of this unaccountable waywardness.

With no small anxiety, therefore, we awaited the approach of some of
the dignitaries of Mardi; for by this collective appellation, the
people informed us, their islands were known.

We waited not long. Of a sudden, from the sea-side, a single shrill cry
was heard. A moment more, and the blast of numerous conch shells
startled the air; a confused clamor drew nearer and nearer; and flying
our eyes in the direction of these sounds, we impatiently awaited what
was to follow.




CHAPTER LIV.
A Gentleman From The Sun


Never before had I seen the deep foliage of woodlands navigated by
canoes. But on they came sailing through the leaves; two abreast; borne
on men’s shoulders; in each a chief, carried along to the measured
march of his bearers; paddle blades reversed under arms. As they
emerged, the multitude made gestures of homage. At the distance of some
eight or ten paces the procession halted; when the kings alighted to
the ground.

They were fine-looking men, arrayed in various garbs. Rare the show of
stained feathers, and jewels, and other adornments. Brave the floating
of dyed mantles.

The regal bearing of these personages, the deference paid them, and
their entire self-possession, not a little surprised me. And it seemed
preposterous, to assume a divine dignity in the presence of these
undoubted potentates of _terra firma_. Taji seemed oozing from my
fingers’ ends. But courage! and erecting my crest, I strove to look
every inch the character I had determined to assume.

For a time, it was almost impossible to tell with what emotions
precisely the chiefs were regarding me. They said not a word.

But plucking up heart of grace, I crossed my cutlass on my chest, and
reposing my hand on the hilt, addressed their High Mightinesses thus.
“Men of Mardi, I come from the sun. When this morning it rose and
touched the wave, I pushed my shallop from its golden beach, and hither
sailed before its level rays. I am Taji.”

More would have been added, but I paused for the effect of my exordium.

Stepping back a pace or two, the chiefs eagerly conversed.

Emboldened, I returned to the charge, and labored hard to impress them
with just such impressions of me and mine, as I deemed desirable. The
gentle Yillah was a seraph from the sun; Samoa I had picked off a reef
in my route from that orb; and as for the Skyeman, why, as his name
imported, he came from above. In a word, we were all strolling
divinities.

Advancing toward the Chamois, one of the kings, a calm old man, now
addressed me as follows:—“Is this indeed Taji? he, who according to a
tradition, was to return to us after five thousand moons? But that
period is yet unexpired. What bring’st thou hither then, Taji, before
thy time? Thou wast but a quarrelsome demi-god, say the legends, when
thou dwelt among our sires. But wherefore comest thou, Taji? Truly,
thou wilt interfere with the worship of thy images, and we have plenty
of gods besides thee. But comest thou to fight?—We have plenty of
spears, and desire not thine. Comest thou to dwell?—Small are the
houses of Mardi. Or comest thou to fish in the sea? Tell us, Taji.”

Now, all this was a series of posers hard to be answered; furnishing a
curious example, moreover, of the reception given to strange demi- gods
when they travel without their portmanteaus; and also of the familiar
manner in which these kings address the immortals. Much I mourned that
I had not previously studied better my part, and learned the precise
nature of my previous existence in the land.

But nothing like carrying it bravely.

“Attend. Taji comes, old man, because it pleases him to come. And Taji
will depart when it suits him. Ask the shades of your sires whether
Taji thus scurvily greeted them, when they came stalking into his
presence in the land of spirits. No. Taji spread the banquet. He
removed their mantles. He kindled a fire to drive away the damp. He
said not, ‘Come you to fight, you fogs and vapors? come you to dwell?
or come you to fish in the sea?’ Go to, then, kings of Mardi!”

Upon this, the old king fell back; and his place was supplied by a
noble chief, of a free, frank bearing. Advancing quickly toward the
boat, he exclaimed—“I am Media, the son of Media. Thrice welcome, Taji.
On my island of Odo hast thou an altar. I claim thee for my guest.” He
then reminded the rest, that the strangers had voyaged far, and needed
repose. And, furthermore, that he proposed escorting them forthwith to
his own dominions; where, next day, he would be happy to welcome all
visitants.

And good as his word, he commanded his followers to range themselves
under the Chamois. Springing out of our prow, the Upoluan was followed
by Jarl; leaving Yillah and Taji to be borne therein toward the sea.

Soon, we were once more afloat; by our side, Media sociably seated; six
of his paddlers, perched upon the gunwale, swiftly urging us over the
lagoon.

The transition from the grove to the sea was instantaneous. All seemed
a dream.

The place to which we were hastening, being some distance away, as we
rounded isle after isle, the extent of the Archipelago grew upon us
greatly.




CHAPTER LV.
Tiffin In A Temple


Upon at last drawing nigh to Odo, its appearance somewhat disappointed
me. A small island, of moderate elevation.

But plumb not the height of the house that feasts you. The beach was
lined with expectant natives, who, lifting the Chamois, carried us up
the beach.

Alighting, as they were bearing us along, King Media, designating a
canoe-house hard by, ordered our craft to be deposited therein. This
being done, we stepped upon the soil. It was the first we had pressed
in very many days. It sent a sympathetic thrill through our frames.

Turning his steps inland, Media signed us to follow.

Soon we came to a rude sort of inclosure, fenced in by an imposing
wall. Here a halt was sounded, and in great haste the natives proceeded
to throw down a portion of the stones. This accomplished, we were
signed to enter the fortress thus carried by storm. Upon an artificial
mound, opposite the breach, stood a small structure of bamboo, open in
front. Within, was a long pedestal, like a settee, supporting three
images, also of wood, and about the size of men; bearing, likewise, a
remote resemblance to that species of animated nature. Before these
idols was an altar, and at its base many fine mats.

Entering the temple, as if he felt very much at home, Media disposed
these mats so as to form a very pleasant lounge; where he deferentially
entreated Yillah to recline. Then deliberately removing the first idol,
he motioned me to seat myself in its place. Setting aside the middle
one, he quietly established himself in its stead. The displaced
ciphers, meanwhile, standing upright before us, and their blank faces
looking upon this occasion unusually expressive. As yet, not a syllable
as to the meaning of this cavalier treatment of their wooden godships.

We now tranquilly awaited what next might happen, and I earnestly
prayed, that if sacrilege was being committed, the vengeance of the
gods might be averted from an ignoramus like me; notwithstanding the
petitioner himself hailed from the other world. Perfect silence was
preserved: Jarl and Samoa standing a little without the temple; the
first looking quite composed, but his comrade casting wondering glances
at my sociable apotheosis with Media.

Now happening to glance upon the image last removed, I was not long in
detecting a certain resemblance between it and our host. Both were
decorated in the same manner; the carving on the idol exactly
corresponding with the tattooing of the king.

Presently, the silence was relieved by a commotion without: and a
butler approached, staggering under an immense wooden trencher; which,
with profound genuflexions, he deposited upon the altar before us. The
tray was loaded like any harvest wain; heaped up with good things
sundry and divers: Bread-fruit, and cocoanuts, and plantains, and
guavas; all pleasant to the eye, and furnishing good earnest of
something equally pleasant to the palate.

Transported at the sight of these viands, after so long an estrangement
from full indulgence in things green, I was forthwith proceeding to
help Yillah and myself, when, like lightning, a most unwelcome query
obtruded. Did deities dine? Then also recurred what Media had declared
about my shrine in Odo. Was this it? Self- sacrilegious demigod that I
was, was I going to gluttonize on the very offerings, laid before me in
my own sacred fane? Give heed to thy ways, oh Taji, lest thou stumble
and be lost.

But hereupon, what saw we, but his cool majesty of Odo tranquilly
proceeding to lunch in the temple?

How now? Was Media too a god? Egad, it must be so. Else, why his image
here in the fane, and the original so entirely at his ease, with legs
full cosily tucked away under the very altar itself. This put to flight
all appalling apprehensions of the necessity of starving to keep up the
assumption of my divinity. So without more ado I helped myself right
and left; taking the best care of Yillah; who over fed her flushed
beauty with juicy fruits, thereby transferring to her cheek the sweet
glow of the guava.

Our hunger appeased, and Media in token thereof celestially laying his
hand upon the appropriate region, we proceeded to quit the inclosure.
But coming to the wall where the breach had been made, lo, and behold,
no breach was to be seen. But down it came tumbling again, and forth we
issued.

This overthrowing of walls, be it known, is an incidental compliment
paid distinguished personages in this part of Mardi. It would seem to
signify, that such gentry can go nowhere without creating an
impression; even upon the most obdurate substances.

But to return to our ambrosial lunch.

Sublimate, as you will, the idea of our ethereality as intellectual
beings; no sensible man can harbor a doubt, but that there is a vast
deal of satisfaction in dining. More: there is a savor of life and
immortality in substantial fare. Like balloons, we are nothing till
filled.

And well knowing this, nature has provided this jolly round board, our
globe, which in an endless sequence of courses and crops, spreads a
perpetual feast. Though, as with most public banquets, there is no
small crowding, and many go away famished from plenty.




CHAPTER LVI.
King Media A Host


Striking into a grove, about sunset we emerged upon a fine, clear
space, and spied a city in the woods.

In the middle of all, like a generalissimo’s marquee among tents, was a
structure more imposing than the rest. Here, abode King Media.

Disposed round a space some fifty yards square, were many palm posts
staked firmly in the earth. A man’s height from the ground, these
supported numerous horizontal trunks, upon which lay a flooring of
habiscus. High over this dais, but resting upon independent supports
beyond, a gable-ended roof sloped away to within a short distance of
the ground.

Such was the palace.

We entered it by an arched, arbored entrance, at one of its
palmetto-thatched ends. But not through this exclusive portal entered
the Islanders. Humbly stooping, they found ingress under the drooping
eaves. A custom immemorial, and well calculated to remind all
contumacious subjects of the dignity of the habitation thus entered.

Three steps led to the summit of the dais, where piles of soft mats,
and light pillows of woven grass, stuffed with the golden down of a
wild thistle, invited all loiterers to lounge.

How pleasant the twilight that welled up from under the low eaves,
above which we were seated. And how obvious now the design of the roof.
No shade more grateful and complete; the garish sun lingering without
like some lackey in waiting.

But who is this in the corner, gaping at us like a butler in a
quandary? Media’s household deity, in the guise of a plethoric monster,
his enormous head lolling back, and wide, gaping mouth stuffed full of
fresh fruits and green leaves. Truly, had the idol possessed a soul
under his knotty ribs, how tantalizing to hold so glorious a mouthful
without the power of deglutition. Far worse than the inexorable
lock-jaw, which will not admit of the step preliminary to a swallow.

This jolly Josh image was that of an inferior deity, the god of Good
Cheer, and often after, we met with his merry round mouth in many other
abodes in Mardi. Daily, his jaws are replenished, as a flower vase in
summer.

But did the demi-divine Media thus brook the perpetual presence of a
subaltern divinity? Still more; did he render it homage? But ere long
the Mardian mythology will be discussed, thereby making plain what may
now seem anomalous.

Politely escorting us into his palace, Media did the honors by inviting
his guests to recline. He then seemed very anxious to impress us with
the fact, that, by bringing us to his home, and thereby charging the
royal larder with our maintenance, he had taken no hasty or imprudent
step. His merry butlers kept piling round us viands, till we were well
nigh walled in. At every fresh deposit, Media directing our attention
to the same, as yet additional evidence of his ample resources as a
host. The evidence was finally closed by dragging under the eaves a
felled plantain tree, the spike of red ripe fruit, sprouting therefrom,
blushing all over, at so rude an introduction to the notice of
strangers.

During this scene, Jarl was privily nudging Samoa, in wonderment, to
know what upon earth it all meant. But Samoa, scarcely deigning to
notice interrogatories propounded through the elbow, only let drop a
vague hint or two.

It was quite amusing, what airs Samoa now gave himself, at least toward
my Viking. Among the Mardians he was at home. And who, when there,
stretches not out his legs, and says unto himself, “Who is greater than
I?”

To be plain: concerning himself and the Skyeman, the tables were
turned. At sea, Jarl had been the oracle: an old sea-sage, learned in
hemp and helm. But our craft high and dry, the Upoluan lifted his crest
as the erudite pagan; master of Gog and Magog, expounder of all things
heathenish and obscure.

An hour or two was now laughed away in very charming conversation with
Media; when I hinted, that a couch and solitude would be acceptable.
Whereupon, seizing a taper, our host escorted us without the palace.
And ushering us into a handsome unoccupied mansion, gave me to
understand that the same was mine. Mounting to the dais, he then
instituted a vigorous investigation, to discern whether every thing was
in order. Not fancying something about the mats, he rolled them up into
bundles, and one by one sent them flying at the heads of his servitors;
who, upon that gentle hint made off with them, soon after returning
with fresh ones. These, with mathematical precision, Media in person
now spread on the dais; looking carefully to the fringes or ruffles
with which they were bordered, as if striving to impart to them a
sentimental expression.

This done, he withdrew.




CHAPTER LVII.
Taji Takes Counsel With Himself


My brief intercourse with our host, had by this time enabled me to form
a pretty good notion of the light, in which I was held by him and his
more intelligent subjects.

His free and easy carriage evinced, that though acknowledging my
assumptions, he was no way overawed by them; treating me as familiarly,
indeed, as if I were a mere mortal, one of the abject generation of
mushrooms.

The scene in the temple, however, had done much toward explaining this
demeanor of his. A demi-god in his own proper person, my claims to a
similar dignity neither struck him with wonder, nor lessened his good
opinion of himself.

As for any thing foreign in my aspect, and my ignorance of Mardian
customs—-all this, instead of begetting a doubt unfavorable to my
pretensions, but strengthened the conviction of them as verities. Thus
has it been in similar instances; but to a much greater extent. The
celebrated navigator referred to in a preceding chapter, was hailed by
the Hawaiians as one of their demi-gods, returned to earth, after a
wide tour of the universe. And they worshiped him as such, though
incessantly he was interrogating them, as to who under the sun his
worshipers were; how their ancestors came on the island; and whether
they would have the kindness to provide his followers with plenty of
pork during his stay.

But a word or two concerning the idols in the shrine at Odo. Superadded
to the homage rendered him as a temporal prince, Media was there
worshiped as a spiritual being. In his corporeal absence, his effigy
receiving all oblations intended for him. And in the days of his
boyhood, listening to the old legends of the Mardian mythology, Media
had conceived a strong liking for the fabulous Taji; a deity whom he
had often declared was worthy a niche in any temple extant. Hence he
had honored my image with a place in his own special shrine; placing it
side by side with his worshipful likeness.

I appreciated the compliment. But of the close companionship of the
other image there, I was heartily ashamed. And with reason. The
nuisance in question being the image of a deified maker of plantain-
pudding, lately deceased; who had been famed far and wide as the most
notable fellow of his profession in the whole Archipelago. During his
sublunary career, having been attached to the household of Media, his
grateful master had afterward seen fit to crown his celebrity by this
posthumous distinction: a circumstance sadly subtracting from the
dignity of an apotheosis. Nor must it here be omitted, that in this
part of Mardi culinary artists are accounted worthy of high
consideration. For among these people of Odo, the matter of eating and
drinking is held a matter of life and of death. “Drag away my queen
from my arms,” said old Tyty when overcome of Adommo, “but leave me my
cook.”

Now, among the Mardians there were plenty of incarnated deities to keep
me in countenance. Most of the kings of the Archipelago, besides Media,
claiming homage as demi-gods; and that, too, by virtue of hereditary
descent, the divine spark being transmissable from father to son. In
illustration of this, was the fact, that in several instances the
people of the land addressed the supreme god Oro, in the very same
terms employed in the political adoration of their sublunary rulers.

Ay: there were deities in Mardi far greater and taller than I: right
royal monarchs to boot, living in jolly round tabernacles of jolly
brown clay; and feasting, and roystering, and lording it in yellow
tabernacles of bamboo. These demi-gods had wherewithal to sustain their
lofty pretensions. If need were, could crush out of him the infidelity
of a non-conformist. And by this immaculate union of church and state,
god and king, in their own proper persons reigned supreme Caesars over
the souls and bodies of their subjects.

Beside these mighty magnates, I and my divinity shrank into nothing. In
their woodland ante-chambers plebeian deities were kept lingering. For
be it known, that in due time we met with several decayed, broken down
demi-gods: magnificos of no mark in Mardi; having no temples wherein to
feast personal admirers, or spiritual devotees. They wandered about
forlorn and friendless. And oftentimes in their dinnerless despair
hugely gluttonized, and would fain have grown fat, by reflecting upon
the magnificence of their genealogies. But poor fellows! like shabby
Scotch lords in London in King James’s time, the very multitude of them
confounded distinction. And since they could show no rent-roll, they
were permitted to fume unheeded.

Upon the whole, so numerous were living and breathing gods in Mardi,
that I held my divinity but cheaply. And seeing such a host of
immortals, and hearing of multitudes more, purely spiritual in their
nature, haunting woodlands and streams; my views of theology grew
strangely confused; I began to bethink me of the Jew that rejected the
Talmud, and his all-permeating principle, to which Goethe and others
have subscribed.

Instead, then, of being struck with the audacity of endeavoring to palm
myself off as a god—the way in which the thing first impressed me—I now
perceived that I might be a god as much as I pleased, and yet not whisk
a lion’s tail after all at least on that special account.

As for Media’s reception, its graciousness was not wholly owing to the
divine character imputed to me. His, he believed to be the same. But to
a whim, a freakishness in his soul, which led him to fancy me as one
among many, not as one with no peer.

But the apparent unconcern of King Media with respect to my godship, by
no means so much surprised me, as his unaffected indifference to my
amazing voyage from the sun; his indifference to the sun itself; and
all the wonderful circumstances that must have attended my departure.
Whether he had ever been there himself, that he regarded a solar trip
with so much unconcern, almost became a question in my mind. Certain it
is, that as a mere traveler he must have deemed me no very great
prodigy.

My surprise at these things was enhanced by reflecting, that to the
people of the Archipelago the map of Mardi was the map of the world.
With the exception of certain islands out of sight and at an indefinite
distance, they had no certain knowledge of any isles but their own.

And, no long time elapsed ere I had still additional reasons to cease
wondering at the easy faith accorded to the story which I had given of
myself. For these Mardians were familiar with still greater marvels
than mine; verily believing in prodigies of all sorts. Any one of them
put my exploits to the blush.

Look to thy ways then, Taji, thought I, and carry not thy crest too
high. Of a surety, thou hast more peers than inferiors. Thou art
overtopped all round. Bear thyself discreetly and not haughtily, Taji.
It will not answer to give thyself airs. Abstain from all consequential
allusions to the other world, and the genteel deities among whom thou
hast circled. Sport not too jauntily thy raiment, because it is novel
in Mardi; nor boast of the fleetness of thy Chamois, because it is
unlike a canoe. Vaunt not of thy pedigree, Taji; for Media himself will
measure it with thee there by the furlong. Be not a “snob,” Taji.

So then, weighing all things well, and myself severely, I resolved to
follow my Mentor’s wise counsel; neither arrogating aught, nor abating
of just dues; but circulating freely, sociably, and frankly, among the
gods, heroes, high priests, kings, and gentlemen, that made up the
principalities of Mardi.




CHAPTER LVIII.
Mardi By Night And Yillah By Day


During the night following our arrival, many dreams were no doubt
dreamt in Odo. But my thoughts were wakeful. And while all others
slept, obeying a restless impulse, I stole without into the magical
starlight. There are those who in a strange land ever love to view it
by night.

It has been said, that the opening in the groves where was situated
Media’s city, was elevated above the surrounding plains. Hence was
commanded a broad reach of prospect.

Far and wide was deep low-sobbing repose of man and nature. The groves
were motionless; and in the meadows, like goblins, the shadows advanced
and retreated. Full before me, lay the Mardian fleet of isles,
profoundly at anchor within their coral harbor. Near by was one belted
round by a frothy luminous reef, wherein it lay, like Saturn in its
ring.

From all their summits, went up a milk-white smoke, as from Indian
wigwams in the hazy harvest-moon. And floating away, these vapors
blended with the faint mist, as of a cataract, hovering over the
circumvallating reef. Far beyond all, and far into the infinite night,
surged the jet-black ocean.

But how tranquil the wide lagoon, which mirrored the burning spots in
heaven! Deep down into its innermost heart penetrated the slanting rays
of Hesperus like a shaft of light, sunk far into mysterious Golcondas,
where myriad gnomes seemed toiling. Soon a light breeze rippled the
water, and the shaft was seen no more. But the moon’s bright wake was
still revealed: a silver track, tipping every wave-crest in its course,
till each seemed a pearly, scroll-prowed nautilus, buoyant with some
elfin crew.

From earth to heaven! High above me was Night’s shadowy bower,
traversed, vine-like, by the Milky Way, and heavy with golden
clusterings. Oh stars! oh eyes, that see me, wheresoe’er I roam:
serene, intent, inscrutable for aye, tell me Sybils, what I
am.—Wondrous worlds on worlds! Lo, round and round me, shining, awful
spells: all glorious, vivid constellations, God’s diadem ye are! To
you, ye stars, man owes his subtlest raptures, thoughts unspeakable,
yet full of faith.

But how your mild effulgence stings the boding heart. Am I a murderer,
stars?

Hours pass. The starry trance is departed. Long waited for, the dawn
now comes.

First, breaking along the waking face; peeping from out the languid
lids; then shining forth in longer glances; till, like the sun, up
comes the soul, and sheds its rays abroad.

When thus my Yillah did daily dawn, how she lit up my world; tinging
more rosily the roseate clouds, that in her summer cheek played to and
fro, like clouds in Italian air.




CHAPTER LIX.
Their Morning Meal


Not wholly is our world made up of bright stars and bright eyes: so now
to our story.

A conscientious host should ever be up betimes, to look after the
welfare of his guests, and see to it that their day begin auspiciously.
King Media announced the advent of the sun, by rustling at my bower’s
eaves in person.

A repast was spread in an adjoining arbor, which Media’s pages had
smoothed for our reception, and where his subordinate chiefs were in
attendance. Here we reclined upon mats. Balmy and fresh blew the breath
of the morning; golden vapors were upon the mountains, silver sheen
upon the grass; and the birds were at matins in the groves; their
bright plumage flashing into view, here and there, as if some rainbow
were crouching in the foliage.

Spread before us were viands, served in quaint-shaped, curiously-dyed
gourds, not Sevres, but almost as tasteful; and like true porcelain,
fire had tempered them. Green and yielding, they are plucked from the
tree; and emptied of their pulp, are scratched over with minute marks,
like those of a line engraving. The ground prepared, the various
figures are carefully etched. And the outlines filled up with delicate
punctures, certain vegetable oils are poured over them, for coloring.
Filled with a peculiar species of earth, the gourd is now placed in an
oven in the ground. And in due time exhumed, emptied of its contents,
and washed in the stream, it presents a deep-dyed exterior; every
figure distinctly traced and opaque, but the ground semi-transparent.
In some cases, owing to the variety of dyes employed, each figure is of
a different hue.

More glorious goblets than these for the drinking of wine, went never
from hand to mouth. Capacious as pitchers, they almost superseded
decanters.

Now, in a tropical climate, fruit, with light wines, forms the only fit
meal of a morning. And with orchards and vineyards forever in sight,
who but the Hetman of the Cossacs would desire more? We had plenty of
the juice of the grape. But of this hereafter; there are some fine old
cellars, and plenty of good cheer in store.

During the repast, Media, for a time, was much taken up with our
raiment. He begged me to examine for a moment the texture of his right
royal robe, and observe how much superior it was to my own. It put my
mantle to the blush; being tastefully stained with rare devices in red
and black; and bordered with dyed fringes of feathers, and tassels of
red birds’ claws.

Next came under observation the Skyeman’s Guayaquil hat; at whose
preposterous shape, our host laughed in derision; clapping a great
conical calabash upon the head of an attendant, and saying that now he
was Jarl. At this, and all similar sallies, Samoa was sure to roar
louder than any; though mirth was no constitutional thing with him. But
he seemed rejoiced at the opportunity of turning upon us the ridicule,
which as a barbarian among whites, he himself had so often experienced.

These pleasantries over, King Media very slightly drew himself up, as
if to make amends for his previous unbending. He discoursed imperially
with his chiefs; nodded his sovereign will to his pages; called for
another gourd of wine; in all respects carrying his royalty bravely.

The repast concluded, we journeyed to the canoe-house, where we found
the little Chamois stabled like a steed. One solitary depredation had
been committed. Its sides and bottom had been completely denuded of the
minute green barnacles, and short sea-grass, which, like so many
leeches, had fastened to our planks during our long, lazy voyage.

By the people they had been devoured as dainties.




CHAPTER LX.
Belshazzar On The Bench


Now, Media was king of Odo. And from the simplicity of his manners
hitherto, and his easy, frank demeanor toward ourselves, had we
foolishly doubted that fact, no skepticism could have survived an
illustration of it, which this very day we witnessed at noon.

For at high noon, Media was wont to don his dignity with his symbols of
state; and sit on his judgment divan or throne, to hear and try all
causes brought before him, and fulminate his royal decrees.

This divan was elevated at one end of a spacious arbor, formed by an
avenue of regal palms, which in brave state, held aloft their
majestical canopy.

The crown of the island prince was of the primitive old Eastern style;
in shape, similar, perhaps, to that jauntily sported as a foraging cap
by his sacred majesty King Nimrod, who so lustily followed the hounds.
It was a plaited turban of red tappa, radiated by the pointed and
polished white bones of the Ray-fish. These diverged from a bandeau or
fillet of the most precious pearls; brought up from the sea by the
deepest diving mermen of Mardi. From the middle of the crown rose a
tri-foiled spear-head. And a spear- headed scepter graced the right
hand of the king.

Now, for all the rant of your democrats, a fine king on a throne is a
very fine sight to behold. He looks very much like a god. No wonder
that his more dutiful subjects so swore, that their good lord and
master King Media was demi-divine.

A king on his throne! Ah, believe me, ye Gracchi, ye Acephali, ye
Levelers, it is something worth seeing, be sure; whether beheld at
Babylon the Tremendous, when Nebuchadnezzar was crowned; at old Scone
in the days of Macbeth; at Rheims, among Oriflammes, at the coronation
of Louis le Grand; at Westminster Abbey, when the gentlemanly George
doffed his beaver for a diadem; or under the soft shade of palm trees
on an isle in the sea.

Man lording it over man, man kneeling to man, is a spectacle that
Gabriel might well travel hitherward to behold; for never did he behold
it in heaven. But Darius giving laws to the Medes and the Persians, or
the conqueror of Bactria with king-cattle yoked to his car, was not a
whit more sublime, than Beau Brummel magnificently ringing for his
valet.

A king on his throne! It is Jupiter nodding in the councils of Olympus;
Satan, seen among the coronets in Hell.

A king on his throne! It is the sun over a mountain; the sun over
law-giving Sinai; the sun in our system: planets, duke-like, dancing
attendance, and baronial satellites in waiting.

A king on his throne! After all, but a gentleman seated. And thus sat
the good lord, King Media.

Time passed. And after trying and dismissing several minor affairs,
Media called for certain witnesses to testify concerning one Jiromo, a
foolhardy wight, who had been silly enough to plot against the majesty
now sitting judge and jury upon him.

His guilt was clear. And the witnesses being heard, from a bunch of
palm plumes Media taking a leaf, placed it in the hand of a runner or
pursuivant, saying, “This to Jiromo, where he is prisoned; with his
king’s compliments; say we here wait for his head.”

It was doffed like a turban before a Dey, and brought back on the
instant.

Now came certain lean-visaged, poverty-stricken, and hence
suspicious-looking varlets, grumbling and growling, and amiable as
Bruin. They came muttering some wild jargon about “bulwarks,”
“bulkheads,” “cofferdams,” “safeguards,” “noble charters,” “shields,”
and “paladiums,” “great and glorious birthrights,” and other
unintelligible gibberish.

Of the pursuivants, these worthies asked audience of Media.

“Go, kneel at the throne,” was the answer.

“Our knee-pans are stiff with sciatics,” was the rheumatic reply.

“An artifice to keep on your legs,” said the pursuivants.

And advancing they salamed, and told Media the excuse of those
sour-looking varlets. Whereupon my lord commanded them to down on their
marrow-bones instanter, either before him or the headsman, whichsoever
they pleased.

They preferred the former. And as they there kneeled, in vain did men
with sharp ears (who abound in all courts) prick their auriculars, to
list to that strange crackling and firing off of bone balls and
sockets, ever incident to the genuflections of rheumatic courtiers.

In a row, then, these selfsame knee-pans did kneel before the king; who
eyed them as eagles in air do goslings on dunghills; or hunters, hounds
crouching round their calves.

“Your prayer?” said Media.

It was a petition, that thereafter all differences between man and man
in Ode, together with all alleged offenses against the state, might be
tried by twelve good men and true. These twelve to be unobnoxious to
the party or parties concerned; their peers; and previously unbiased
touching the matter at issue. Furthermore, that unanimity in these
twelve should be indispensable to a verdict; and no dinner be
vouchsafed till unanimity came.

Loud and long laughed King Media in scorn.

“This be your judge,” he cried, swaying his scepter. “What! are twelve
wise men more wise than one? or will twelve fools, put together, make
one sage? Are twelve honest men more honest than one? or twelve knaves
less knavish than one? And if, of twelve men, three be fools, and three
wise, three knaves, and three upright, how obtain real unanimity from
such?

“But if twelve judges be better than one, then are twelve hundred
better than twelve. But take the whole populace for a judge, and you
will long wait for a unanimous verdict.

“If upon a thing dubious, there be little unanimity in the conflicting
opinions of one man’s mind, how expect it in the uproar of twelve
puzzled brains? though much unanimity be found in twelve hungry
stomachs.

“Judges unobnoxious to the accused! Apply it to a criminal case. Ha!
ha! if peradventure a Cacti be rejected, because he had seen the
accused commit the crime for which he is arraigned. Then, his mind
would be biased: no impartiality from him! Or your testy accused might
object to another, because of his tomahawk nose, or a cruel squint of
the eye.

“Of all follies the most foolish! Know ye from me, that true peers
render not true verdicts. Jiromo was a rebel. Had I tried him by his
peers, I had tried him by rebels; and the rebel had rebelled to some
purpose.

“Away! As unerring justice dwells in a unity, and as one judge will at
last judge the world beyond all appeal; so—though often here below
justice be hard to attain—does man come nearest the mark, when he
imitates that model divine. Hence, one judge is better than twelve.”

“And as Justice, in ideal, is ever painted high lifted above the crowd;
so, from the exaltation of his rank, an honest king is the best of
those unical judges, which individually are better than twelve. And
therefore am I, King Media, the best judge in this land.”

“Subjects! so long as I live, I will rule you and judge you alone. And
though you here kneeled before me till you grew into the ground, and
there took root, no yea to your petition will you get from this throne.
I am king: ye are slaves. Mine to command: yours to obey. And this hour
I decree, that henceforth no gibberish of bulwarks and bulkheads be
heard in this land. For a dead bulwark and a bulkhead, to dam off
sedition, will I make of that man, who again but breathes those bulky
words. Ho! spears! see that these knee-pans here kneel till set of
sun.”

High noon was now passed; and removing his crown, and placing it on the
dais for the kneelers to look at during their devotions, King Media
departed from that place, and once more played the agreeable host.




CHAPTER LXI.
An Incognito


For the rest of that day, and several that followed, we were
continually receiving visits from the neighboring islands; whose
inhabitants in fleets and flotillas flocked round Odo to behold the
guests of its lord. Among them came many messengers from the
neighboring kings with soft speeches and gifts.

But it were needless to detail our various interviews, or relate in
what manifold ways, the royal strangers gave token of their interest
concerning us.

Upon the third day, however, there was noticed a mysterious figure,
like the inscrutable incognitos sometimes encountered, crossing the
tower-shadowed Plaza of Assignations at Lima. It was enveloped in a
dark robe of tappa, so drawn and plaited about the limbs; and with one
hand, so wimpled about the face, as only to expose a solitary eye. But
that eye was a world. Now it was fixed upon Yillah with a sinister
glance, and now upon me, but with a different expression. However great
the crowd, however tumultuous, that fathomless eye gazed on; till at
last it seemed no eye, but a spirit, forever prying into my soul. Often
I strove to approach it, but it would evade me, soon reappearing.

Pointing out the apparition to Media, I intreated him to take means to
fix it, that my suspicions might be dispelled, as to its being
incorporeal. He replied that, by courtesy, incognitos were sacred.
Insomuch that the close-plaited robe and the wimple were secure as a
castle. At last, to my relief, the phantom disappeared, and was seen no
more.

Numerous and fervent the invitations received to return the calls
wherewith we were honored. But for the present we declined them;
preferring to establish ourselves firmly in the heart of Media, ere
encountering the vicissitudes of roaming. In a multitude of
acquaintances is less security, than in one faithful friend.

Now, while these civilities were being received, and on the fourth
morning after our arrival, there landed on the beach three black-eyed
damsels, deep brunettes, habited in long variegated robes, and with gay
blossoms on their heads.

With many salams, the strangers were ushered into my presence by an old
white-haired servitor of Media’s, who with a parting congé murmured,
“From Queen Hautia,” then departed. Surprised, I stood mute, and
welcomed them.

The first, with many smiles and blandishments, waved before me a
many-tinted Iris: the flag-flower streaming with pennons. Advancing,
the second then presented three rose-hued purple-veined Circea flowers,
the dew still clinging to them. The third placed in my hand a moss-rose
bud; then, a Venus-car.

“Thanks for your favors! now your message.”

Starting at this reception, graciously intended, they conferred a
moment; when the Iris-bearer said in winning phrase, “We come from
Hautia, whose moss-rose you hold.”

“All thanks to Hautia then; the bud is very fragrant.”

Then she pointed to the Venus-car.

“This too is sweet; thanks to Hautia for her flowers. Pray, bring me
more.”

“He mocks our mistress,” and gliding from me, they waved witch- hazels,
leaving me alone and wondering.

Informing Media of this scene, he smiled; threw out queer hints of
Hautia; but knew not what her message meant.

At first this affair occasioned me no little uneasiness, with much
matter for marveling; but in the novel pleasure of our sojourn in Odo,
it soon slipped from my mind; nor for some time, did I again hear aught
of Queen Hautia.




CHAPTER LXII.
Taji Retires From The World


After a while, when the strangers came not in shoals as before, I
proposed to our host, a stroll over his dominions; desirous of
beholding the same, and secretly induced by the hope of selecting an
abode, more agreeable to my fastidious taste, than the one already
assigned me.

The ramble over—a pleasant one it was—it resulted in a determination on
my part to quit Odo. Yet not to go very far; only ten or twelve yards,
to a little green tuft of an islet; one of many, which here and there,
all round the island, nestled like birds’ nests in the branching boughs
of the coral grove, whose roots laid hold of the foundations of the
deep. Between these islets and the shore, extended shelving ledges,
with shallows above, just sufficient to float a canoe. One of these
islets was wooded and wined; an arbor in the sea. And here, Media
permitting, I decided to dwell.

Not long was Media in complying; nor long, ere my retreat was in
readiness. Laced together, the twisting boughs were closely thatched.
And thatched were the sides also, with deep crimson pandannus leaves;
whose long, forked spears, lifted by the breeze, caused the whole place
to blaze, as with flames. Canes, laid on palm trunks, formed the floor.
How elastic! In vogue all over Odo, among the chiefs, it imparted such
a buoyancy to the person, that to this special cause may be imputed in
good part the famous fine spirits of the nobles.

Hypochondriac! essay the elastic flooring! It shall so pleasantly and
gently jolt thee, as to shake up, and pack off the stagnant humors
mantling thy pool-like soul.

Such was my dwelling. But I make no mention of sundry little
appurtenances of tropical housekeeping: calabashes, cocoanut shells,
and rolls of fine tappa; till with Yillah seated at last in my arbor, I
looked round, and wanted for naught.

But what of Jarl and Samoa? Why Jarl must needs be fanciful, as well as
myself. Like a bachelor in chambers, he settled down right opposite to
me, on the main land, in a little wigwam in the grove.

But Samoa, following not his comrade’s example, still tarried in the
camp of the Hittites and Jebusites of Odo. Beguiling men of their
leisure by his marvelous stories: and maidens of their hearts by his
marvelous wiles.

When I chose, I was completely undisturbed in my arbor; an ukase of
Media’s forbidding indiscriminate intrusion. But thrice in the day came
a garrulous old man with my viands.

Thus sequestered, however, I could not entirely elude the pryings of
the people of the neighboring islands; who often passed by, slowly
paddling, and earnestly regarding my retreat. But gliding along at a
distance, and never essaying a landing, their occasional vicinity
troubled me but little. But now and then of an evening, when thick and
fleet the shadows were falling, dim glimpses of a canoe would be spied;
hovering about the place like a ghost. And once, in the stillness of
the night, hearing the near ripple of a prow, I sallied forth, but the
phantom quickly departed.

That night, Yillah shuddered as she slept. “The whirl-pool,” she
murmured, “sweet mosses.” Next day she was lost in reveries, plucking
pensive hyacinths, or gazing intently into the lagoon.




CHAPTER LXIII.
Odo And Its Lord


Time now to enter upon some further description of the island and its
lord.

And first for Media: a gallant gentleman and king. From a goodly stock
he came. In his endless pedigree, reckoning deities by decimals,
innumerable kings, and scores of great heroes, chiefs, and priests. Nor
in person, did he belie his origin. No far-descended dwarf was he, the
least of a receding race. He stood like a palm tree; about whose
acanthus capital droops not more gracefully the silken fringes, than
Media’s locks upon his noble brow. Strong was his arm to wield the
club, or hurl the javelin; and potent, I ween, round a maiden’s waist.

Thus much here for Media. Now comes his isle.

Our pleasant ramble found it a little round world by itself; full of
beauties as a garden; chequered by charming groves; watered by roving
brooks; and fringed all round by a border of palm trees, whose roots
drew nourishment from the water. But though abounding in other quarters
of the Archipelago, not a solitary bread-fruit grew in Odo. A
noteworthy circumstance, observable in these regions, where islands
close adjoining, so differ in their soil, that certain fruits growing
genially in one, are foreign to another. But Odo was famed for its
guavas, whose flavor was likened to the flavor of new-blown lips; and
for its grapes, whose juices prompted many a laugh and many a groan.

Beside the city where Media dwelt, there were few other clusters of
habitations in Odo. The higher classes living, here and there, in
separate households; but not as eremites. Some buried themselves in the
cool, quivering bosoms of the groves. Others, fancying a marine
vicinity, dwelt hard by the beach in little cages of bamboo; whence of
mornings they sallied out with jocund cries, and went plunging into the
refreshing bath, whose frothy margin was the threshold of their
dwellings. Others still, like birds, built their nests among the sylvan
nooks of the elevated interior; whence all below, and hazy green, lay
steeped in languor the island’s throbbing heart.

Thus dwelt the chiefs and merry men of mark. The common sort, including
serfs, and Helots, war-captives held in bondage, lived in secret
places, hard to find. Whence it came, that, to a stranger, the whole
isle looked care-free and beautiful. Deep among the ravines and the
rocks, these beings lived in noisome caves, lairs for beasts, not human
homes; or built them coops of rotten boughs—living trees were banned
them—whose mouldy hearts hatched vermin. Fearing infection of some
plague, born of this filth, the chiefs of Odo seldom passed that way
and looking round within their green retreats, and pouring out their
wine, and plucking from orchards of the best, marveled how these swine
could grovel in the mire, and wear such sallow cheeks. But they offered
no sweet homes; from that mire they never sought to drag them out; they
open threw no orchard; and intermitted not the mandates that condemned
their drudges to a life of deaths. Sad sight! to see those
round-shouldered Helots, stooping in their trenches: artificial, three
in number, and concentric: the isle well nigh surrounding. And herein,
fed by oozy loam, and kindly dew from heaven, and bitter sweat from
men, grew as in hot-beds the nutritious Taro.

Toil is man’s allotment; toil of brain, or toil of hands, or a grief
that’s more than either, the grief and sin of idleness. But when man
toils and slays himself for masters who withhold the life he gives to
them—then, then, the soul screams out, and every sinew cracks. So with
these poor serfs. And few of them could choose but be the brutes they
seemed.

Now needs it to be said, that Odo was no land of pleasure unalloyed,
and plenty without a pause?—Odo, in whose lurking-places infants turned
from breasts, whence flowed no nourishment.—Odo, in whose inmost
haunts, dark groves were brooding, passing which you heard most dismal
cries, and voices cursing Media. There, men were scourged; their crime,
a heresy; the heresy, that Media was no demigod. For this they
shrieked. Their fathers shrieked before; their fathers, who, tormented,
said, “Happy we to groan, that our children’s children may be glad.”
But their children’s children howled. Yet these, too, echoed previous
generations, and loudly swore, “The pit that’s dug for us may prove
another’s grave.”

But let all pass. To look at, and to roam about of holidays, Odo seemed
a happy land. The palm-trees waved—though here and there you marked one
sear and palsy-smitten; the flowers bloomed—though dead ones moldered
in decay; the waves ran up the strand in glee—though, receding, they
sometimes left behind bones mixed with shells.

But else than these, no sign of death was seen throughout the isle. Did
men in Odo live for aye? Was Ponce de Leon’s fountain there? For near
and far, you saw no ranks and files of graves, no generations harvested
in winrows. In Odo, no hard-hearted nabob slept beneath a gentle
epitaph; no requiescat-in-pace mocked a sinner damned; no memento-mori
admonished men to live while yet they might. Here Death hid his skull;
and hid it in the sea, the common sepulcher of Odo. Not dust to dust,
but dust to brine; not hearses but canoes. For all who died upon that
isle were carried out beyond the outer reef, and there were buried with
their sires’ sires. Hence came the thought, that of gusty nights, when
round the isles, and high toward heaven, flew the white reef’s rack and
foam, that then and there, kept chattering watch and ward, the myriads
that were ocean-tombed.

But why these watery obsequies?

Odo was but a little isle, and must the living make way for the dead,
and Life’s small colony be dislodged by Death’s grim hosts; as the
gaunt tribes of Tamerlane o’erspread the tented pastures of the Khan?

And now, what follows, said these Islanders: “Why sow corruption in the
soil which yields us life? We would not pluck our grapes from over
graves. This earth’s an urn for flowers, not for ashes.”

They said that Oro, the supreme, had made a cemetery of the sea.

And what more glorious grave? Was Mausolus more sublimely urned? Or do
the minster-lamps that burn before the tomb of Charlemagne, show more
of pomp, than all the stars, that blaze above the shipwrecked mariner?

But no more of the dead; men shrug their shoulders, and love not their
company; though full soon we shall all have them for fellows.




CHAPTER LXIV.
Yillah A Phantom


For a time we were happy in Odo: Yillah and I in our islet. Nor did the
pearl on her bosom glow more rosily than the roses in her cheeks;
though at intervals they waned and departed; and deadly pale was her
glance, when she murmured of the whirlpool and mosses. As pale my soul,
bethinking me of Aleema the priest.

But day by day, did her spell weave round me its magic, and all the
hidden things of her being grew more lovely and strange. Did I commune
with a spirit? Often I thought that Paradise had overtaken me on earth,
and that Yillah was verily an angel, and hence the mysteries that
hallowed her.

But how fleeting our joys. Storms follow bright dawnings.—Long memories
of short-lived scenes, sad thoughts of joyous hours—how common are ye
to all mankind. When happy, do we pause and say—“Lo, thy felicity, my
soul?” No: happiness seldom seems happiness, except when looked back
upon from woes. A flowery landscape, you must come out of, to behold.

Sped the hours, the days, the one brief moment of our joys. Fairy bower
in the fair lagoon, scene of sylvan ease and heart’s repose,—Oh,
Yillah, Yillah! All the woods repeat the sound, the wild, wild woods of
my wild soul. Yillah! Yillah! cry the small strange voices in me, and
evermore, and far and deep, they echo on.

Days passed. When one morning I found the arbor vacant. Gone! A dream.
I closed my eyes, and would have dreamed her back. In vain. Starting, I
called upon her name; but none replied. Fleeing from the islet, I
gained the neighboring shore, and searched among the woods; and my
comrades meeting, besought their aid. But idle all. No glimpse of
aught, save trees and flowers. Then Media was sought out; the event
made known; and quickly, bands were summoned to range the isle.

Noon came; but no Yillah. When Media averred she was no longer in Odo.
Whither she was gone, or how, he knew not; nor could any imagine.

At this juncture, there chanced to arrive certain messengers from
abroad; who, presuming that all was well with Taji, came with renewed
invitations to visit various pleasant places round about. Among these,
came Queen Hautia’s heralds, with their Iris flag, once more bringing
flowers. But they came and went unheeded.

Setting out to return, these envoys were accompanied by numerous
followers of Media, dispatched to the neighboring islands, to seek out
the missing Yillah. But three days passed; and, one by one, they all
returned; and stood before me silently.

For a time I raved. Then, falling into outer repose, lived for a space
in moods and reveries, with eyes that knew no closing, one glance
forever fixed.

They strove to rouse me. Girls danced and sang; and tales of fairy
times were told; of monstrous imps, and youths enchanted; of groves and
gardens in the sea. Yet still I moved not, hearing all, yet noting
naught. Media cried, “For shame, oh Taji; thou, a god?” and placed a
spear in my nerveless hand. And Jarl loud called upon me to awake.
Samoa marveled.

Still sped the days. And at length, my memory was restored. The
thoughts of things broke over me like returning billows on a beach long
bared. A rush, a foam of recollections!—Sweet Yillah gone, and I
bereaved.

Another interval, and that mood was past. Misery became a memory. The
keen pang a deep vibration. The remembrance seemed the thing
remembered; though bowed with sadness. There are thoughts that lie and
glitter deep: tearful pearls beneath life’s sea, that surges still, and
rolls sunlit, whatever it may hide. Common woes, like fluids, mix all
round. Not so with that other grief. Some mourners load the air with
lamentations; but the loudest notes are struck from hollows. Their
tears flow fast: but the deep spring only wells.

At last I turned to Media, saying I must hie from Odo, and rove
throughout all Mardi; for Yillah might yet be found.

But hereafter, in words, little more of the maiden, till perchance her
fate be learned.




CHAPTER LXV.
Taji Makes Three Acquaintances


Down to this period, I had restrained Samoa from wandering to the
neighboring islands, though he had much desired it, in compliance with
the invitations continually received. But now I informed both him, and
his comrade, of the tour I purposed; desiring their company.

Upon the announcement of my intention to depart, to my no small
surprise Media also proposed to accompany me: a proposition gladly
embraced. It seems, that for some reason, he had not as yet extended
his travels to the more distant islands. Hence the voyage in prospect
was particularly agreeable to him. Nor did he forbear any pains to
insure its prosperity; assuring me, furthermore, that its object must
eventually be crowned with success. “I myself am interested in this
pursuit,” said he; “and trust me, Yillah will be found.”

For the tour of the lagoon, the docile Chamois was proposed; but Media
dissented; saying, that it befitted not the lord of Odo to voyage in
the equipage of his guest. Therefore, three canoes were selected from
his own royal fleet.

One for ourselves, and a trio of companions whom he purposed
introducing to my notice; the rest were reserved for attendants.

Thanks to Media’s taste and heedfulness, the strangers above mentioned
proved truly acceptable.

The first was Mohi, or Braid-Beard, so called from the manner in which
he wore that appendage, exceedingly long and gray. He was a venerable
teller of stories and legends, one of the Keepers of the Chronicles of
the Kings of Mardi.

The second was Babbalanja, a man of a mystical aspect, habited in a
voluminous robe. He was learned in Mardian lore; much given to
quotations from ancient and obsolete authorities: the Ponderings of Old
Bardianna: the Pandects of Alla-Malolla.

Third and last, was Yoomy, or the Warbler. A youthful, long-haired,
blue-eyed minstrel; all fits and starts; at times, absent of mind, and
wan of cheek; but always very neat and pretty in his apparel; wearing
the most becoming of turbans, a Bird of Paradise feather its plume, and
sporting the gayest of sashes. Most given was Yoomy to amorous
melodies, and rondos, and roundelays, very witching to hear. But at
times disdaining the oaten reed, like a clarion he burst forth with
lusty lays of arms and battle; or, in mournful strains, sounded elegies
for departed bards and heroes.

Thus much for Yoomy as a minstrel. In other respects, it would be hard
to depict him. He was so capricious a mortal; so swayed by contrary
moods; so lofty, so humble, so sad, so merry; so made up of a thousand
contradictions, that we must e’en let him depict himself as our story
progresses. And herein it is hoped he will succeed; since no one in
Mardi comprehended him.

Now the trio, thus destined for companions on our voyage, had for some
time been anxious to take the tour of the Archipelago. In particular,
Babbalanja had often expressed the most ardent desire to visit every
one of the isles, in quest of some object, mysteriously hinted. He
murmured deep concern for my loss, the sincerest sympathy; and pressing
my hand more than once, said lowly, “Your pursuit is mine, noble Taji.
Where’er you search, I follow.”

So, too, Yoomy addressed me; but with still more feeling. And something
like this, also, Braid-Beard repeated.

But to my sorrow, I marked that both Mohi and Babbalanja, especially
the last, seemed not so buoyant of hope, concerning lost Yillah, as the
youthful Yoomy, and his high-spirited lord, King Media.

As our voyage would embrace no small period of time, it behoved King
Media to appoint some trustworthy regent, to rule during his absence.
This regent was found in Almanni, a stem-eyed, resolute warrior, a
kinsman of the king.

All things at last in readiness, and the ensuing morning appointed for
a start, Media, on the beach, at eventide, when both light and water
waned, drew a rude map of the lagoon, to compensate for the
obstructions in the way of a comprehensive glance at it from Odo.

And thus was sketched the plan of our voyage; which islands first to
visit; and which to touch at, when we should be homeward bound.




CHAPTER LXVI.
With A Fair Wind, At Sunrise They Sail


True each to his word, up came the sun, and round to my isle came
Media.

How glorious a morning! The new-born clouds all dappled with gold, and
streaked with violet; the sun in high spirits; and the pleasant air
cooled overnight by the blending circumambient fountains, forever
playing all round the reef; the lagoon within, the coral-rimmed basin,
into which they poured, subsiding, hereabouts, into green tranquillity.

But what monsters of canoes! Would they devour an innocent voyager?
their great black prows curling aloft, and thrown back like trunks of
elephants; a dark, snaky length behind, like the sea-serpent’s train.

The prow of the foremost terminated in a large, open, shark’s mouth,
garnished with ten rows of pearly human teeth, curiously inserted into
the sculptured wood. The gunwale was ornamented with rows of rich
spotted Leopard and Tiger-shells; here and there, varied by others,
flat and round, and spirally traced; gay serpents petrified in coils.
These were imbedded in a grooved margin, by means of a resinous
compound, exhaling such spices, that the canoes were odoriferous as the
Indian chests of the Maldives.

The likeness of the foremost canoe to an elephant, was helped by a sort
of canopied Howdah in its stern, of heavy, russet-dyed tappa, tasselled
at the corners with long bunches of cocoanut fibres, stained red. These
swayed to and fro, like the fox-tails on a Tuscarora robe.

But what is this, in the head of the canoe, just under the shark’s
mouth? A grinning little imp of an image; a ring in its nose; cowrie
shells jingling at its ears; with an abominable leer, like that of
Silenus reeling on his ass. It was taking its ease; cosily smoking a
pipe; its bowl, a duodecimo edition of the face of the smoker. This
image looked sternward; everlastingly mocking us.

Of these canoes, it may be well to state, that although during our stay
in Odo, so many barges and shallops had touched there, nothing similar
to Media’s had been seen. But inquiring whence his sea- equipage came,
we were thereupon taught to reverence the same as antiquities and
heir-looms; claw-keeled, dragon-prowed crafts of a bygone generation;
at present, superseded in general use by the more swan-like canoes,
significant of the advanced stage of marine architecture in Mardi. No
sooner was this known, than what had seemed almost hideous in my eyes,
became merely grotesque. Nor could I help being greatly delighted with
the good old family pride of our host.

The upper corners of our sails displayed the family crest of Media;
three upright boars’ tusks, in an heraldic field argent. A fierce
device: Whom rends he?

All things in readiness, we glided away: the multitude waving adieu;
and our flotilla disposed in the following order.

First went the royal Elephant, carrying Media, myself, Jarl, and Samoa;
Mohi the Teller of Legends, Babbalanja, and Yoomy, and six vivacious
paddlers; their broad paddle-blades carved with the royal boars’ tusks,
the same tattooed on their chests for a livery.

And thus, as Media had promised, we voyaged in state. To crown all,
seated sideways in the high, open shark’s-mouth of our prow was a
little dwarf of a boy, one of Media’s pages, a red conch-shell,
bugle-wise suspended at his side. Among various other offices, it was
the duty of little Vee-Vee to announce the advent of his master, upon
drawing near to the islands in our route. Two short bars, projecting
from one side of the prow, furnished him the means of ascent to his
perch.

As we gained the open lagoon with bellied sails, and paddles playing, a
sheaf of foam borne upright at our prow; Yoomy, standing where the
spicy spray flew over him, stretched forth his hand and cried—“The dawn
of day is passed, and Mardi lies all before us: all her isles, and all
her lakes; all her stores of good and evil. Storms may come, our barks
may drown. But blow before us, all ye winds; give us a lively blast,
good clarion; rally round us all our wits; and be this voyage full
gayly sailed, for Yillah will yet be found.”




CHAPTER LXVII.
Little King Peepi


Valapee, or the Isle of Yams, being within plain sight of Media’s
dominions, we were not very long in drawing nigh to its shores.

Two long parallel elevations, rising some three arrow-flights into the
air, double-ridge the island’s entire length, lapping between, a
widening vale, so level withal, that at either extremity, the green of
its groves blends with the green of the lagoon; and the isle seems
divided by a strait.

Within several paces of the beach, our canoes keeled the bottom, and
camel-like mutely hinted that we voyagers must dismount.

Hereupon, the assembled islanders ran into the water, and with bent
shoulders obsequiously desired the honor of transporting us to land.
The beach gained, all present wearing robes instantly stripped them to
the waist; a naked chest being their salute to kings. Very convenient
for the common people, this; their half-clad forms presenting a
perpetual and profound salutation.

Presently, Peepi, the ruler of Valapee drew near: a boy, hardly ten
years old, striding the neck of a burly mute, bearing a long spear
erect before him, to which was attached a canopy of five broad banana
leaves, new plucked. Thus shaded, little Peepi advanced, steadying
himself by the forelock of his bearer.

Besides his bright red robe, the young prince wore nothing but the
symbol of Valapeean royalty; a string of small, close-fitting, concave
shells, coiled and ambushed in his profuse, curly hair; one end falling
over his ear, revealing a serpent’s head, curiously carved from a
nutmeg.

Quite proverbial, the unembarrassed air of young slips of royalty. But
there was something so surprisingly precocious in this young Peepi,
that at first one hardly knew what to conclude.

The first compliments over, the company were invited inland to a shady
retreat.

As we pursued the path, walking between old Mohi the keeper of
chronicles and Samoa the Upoluan, Babbalanja besought the former to
enlighten a stranger concerning the history of this curious Peepi.
Whereupon the chronicler gave us the following account; for all of
which he alone is responsible.

Peepi, it seems, had been proclaimed king before he was born; his sire
dying some few weeks previous to that event; and vacating his divan,
declared that he left a monarch behind.

Marvels were told of Peepi. Along with the royal dignity, and
superadded to the soul possessed in his own proper person, the infant
monarch was supposed to have inherited the valiant spirits of some
twenty heroes, sages, simpletons, and demi-gods, previously lodged in
his sire.

Most opulent in spiritual gifts was this lord of Valapee; the legatee,
moreover, of numerous anonymous souls, bequeathed to him by their late
loyal proprietors. By a slavish act of his convocation of chiefs, he
also possessed the reversion of all and singular the immortal spirits,
whose first grantees might die intestate in Valapee. Servile, yet
audacious senators! thus prospectively to administrate away the
inalienable rights of posterity. But while yet unborn, the people of
Valapee had been deprived of more than they now sought to wrest from
their descendants. And former Peepies, infant and adult, had received
homage more profound, than Peepi the Present. Witness the demeanor of
the chieftains of old, upon every new investiture of the royal serpent.
In a fever of loyalty, they were wont to present themselves before the
heir to the isle, to go through with the court ceremony of the Pupera;
a curious proceeding, so called: inverted endeavors to assume an erect
posture: the nasal organ the base.

It was to the frequent practice of this ceremony, that most intelligent
observers imputed the flattened noses of the elderly chiefs of the
island; who, nevertheless, much gloried therein.

It was these chiefs, also, who still observed the old-fashioned custom
of retiring from the presence of royalty with their heads between their
thighs; so that while advancing in the contrary direction, their faces
might be still deferentially turned toward their lord and master. A
fine view of him did they obtain. All objects look well through an
arch.

But to return to Peepi, the inheritor of souls and subjects. It was an
article of faith with the people of Valapee, that Peepi not only
actually possessed the souls bequeathed to him; but that his own was
enriched by their peculiar qualities: The headlong valor of the late
Tongatona; the pusillanimous discretion of Blandoo; the cunning of
Voyo; the simplicity of Raymonda; the prodigality of Zonoree; the
thrift of Titonti.

But had all these, and similar opposite qualities, simultaneously acted
as motives upon Peepi, certes, he would have been a most pitiable
mortal, in a ceaseless eddy of resolves, incapable of a solitary act.

But blessed be the gods, it was otherwise. Though it fared little
better for his subjects as it was. His assorted souls were uppermost
and active in him, one by one. Today, valiant Tongatona ruled the isle,
meditating wars and invasions; tomorrow, thrice discreet Blandoo, who,
disbanding the levies, turned his attention to the terraces of yams.
And so on in rotation to the end.

Whence, though capable of action, Peepi, by reason of these revolving
souls in him, was one of the most unreliable of beings. What the
open-handed Zonoree promised freely to-day, the parsimonious Titonti
withheld to-morrow; and forever Raymonda was annulling the doings of
Voyo; and Voyo the doings of Raymonda.

What marvel then, that in Valapee all was legislative uproar and
confusion; advance and retreat; abrogations and revivals; foundations
without superstructures; nothing permanent but the island itself.

Nor were there those in the neighboring countries, who failed to reap
profit from this everlasting transition state of the affairs of the
kingdom. All boons from Peepi were entreated when the prodigal Zonoree
was lord of the ascendant. And audacious claims were urged upon the
state when the pusillanimous Blandoo shrank from the thought of
resisting them.

Thus subject to contrary impulses, over which he had not the faintest
control, Peepi was plainly denuded of all moral obligation to virtue.
He was no more a free agent, than the heart which beat in his bosom.
Wherefore, his complaisant parliament had passed a law, recognizing
that curious, but alarming fact; solemnly proclaiming, that King Peepi
was minus a conscience. Agreeable to truth. But when they went further,
and vowed by statute, that Peepi could do no wrong, they assuredly did
violence to the truth; besides, making a sad blunder in their logic.
For far from possessing an absolute aversion to evil, by his very
nature it was the hardest thing in the world for Peepi to do right.

Taking all these things into consideration, then, no wonder that this
wholly irresponsible young prince should be a lad of considerable
assurance, and the easiest manners imaginable.




CHAPTER LXVIII.
How Teeth Were Regarded In Valapee


Coiling through the thickets, like the track of a serpent, wound along
the path we pursued. And ere long we came to a spacious grove,
embowering an oval arbor. Here, we reclined at our ease, and
refreshments were served.

Little worthy of mention occurred, save this. Happening to catch a
glimpse of the white even teeth of Hohora one of our attendants, King
Peepi coolly begged of Media the favor, to have those same dentals
drawn on the spot, and presented to him.

Now human teeth, extracted, are reckoned among the most valuable
ornaments in Mardi. So open wide thy strong box, Hohora, and show thy
treasures. What a gallant array! standing shoulder to shoulder, without
a hiatus between. A complete set of jewelry, indeed, thought Peepi.
But, it seems, not destined for him; Media leaving it to the present
proprietor, whether his dentals should change owners or not.

And here, to prepare the way for certain things hereafter to be
narrated, something farther needs be said concerning the light in which
men’s molars are regarded in Mardi.

Strung together, they are sported for necklaces, or hung in drops from
the ear; they are wrought into dice; in lieu of silken locks, are
exchanged for love tokens.

As in all lands, men smite their breasts, and tear their hair, when
transported with grief; so, in some countries, teeth are stricken out
under the sway of similar emotions. To a very great extent, this was
once practiced in the Hawaiian Islands, ere idol and altar went down.
Still living in Oahu, are many old chiefs, who were present at the
famous obsequies of their royal old generalissimo, Tammahammaha, when
there is no telling how many pounds of ivory were cast upon his grave.

Ah! had the regal white elephants of Siam been there, doubtless they
had offered up their long, hooked tusks, whereon they impale the
leopards, their foes; and the unicorn had surrendered that fixed
bayonet in his forehead; and the imperial Cachalot-whale, the long
chain of white towers in his jaw; yea, over that grim warrior’s grave,
the mooses, and elks, and stags, and fallow-deer had stacked their
antlers, as soldiers their arms on the field.

Terrific shade of tattooed Tammahammaha! if, from a vile dragon’s
molars, rose mailed men, what heroes shall spring from the cannibal
canines once pertaining to warriors themselves!—Am I the witch of
Endor, that I conjure up this ghost? Or, King Saul, that I so quake at
the sight? For, lo! roundabout me Tammahammaha’s tattooing expands,
till all the sky seems a tiger’s skin. But now, the spotted phantom
sweeps by; as a man-of-war’s main-sail, cloud-like, blown far to
leeward in a gale.

Banquo down, we return.

In Valapee, prevails not the barbarous Hindoo custom of offering up
widows to the shades of their lords; for, bereaved, the widows there
marry again. Nor yet prevails the savage Hawaiian custom of offering up
teeth to the manes of the dead; for, at the decease of a friend, the
people rob not their own mouths to testify their woe. On the contrary,
they extract the teeth from the departed, distributing them among the
mourners for memorial legacies; as elsewhere, silver spoons are
bestowed.

From the high value ascribed to dentals throughout the archipelago of
Mardi, and also from their convenient size, they are circulated as
money; strings of teeth being regarded by these people very much as
belts of wampum among the Winnebagoes of the North; or cowries, among
the Bengalese. So, that in Valapee the very beggars are born with a
snug investment in their mouths; too soon, however, to be appropriated
by their lords; leaving them toothless for the rest of their days, and
forcing them to diet on poee-pudding and banana blanc-mange.

As a currency, teeth are far less clumsy than cocoanuts; which, among
certain remote barbarians, circulate for coin; one nut being
equivalent, perhaps, to a penny. The voyager who records the fact,
chuckles over it hugely; as evincing the simplicity of those heathens;
not knowing that he himself was the simpleton; since that currency of
theirs was purposely devised by the men, to check the extravagance of
their women; cocoanuts, for spending money, being such a burden to
carry.

It only remains to be added, that the most solemn oath of a native of
Valapee is that sworn by his tooth. “By this tooth,” said Bondo to
Noojoomo, “by this tooth I swear to be avenged upon thee, oh Noojoomo!”




CHAPTER LXIX.
The Company Discourse, And Braid-Beard Rehearses A Legend


Finding in Valapee no trace of her whom we sought, and but little
pleased with the cringing demeanor of the people, and the wayward
follies of Peepi their lord, we early withdrew from the isle.

As we glided away, King Media issued a sociable decree. He declared it
his royal pleasure, that throughout the voyage, all stiffness and state
etiquette should be suspended: nothing must occur to mar the freedom of
the party. To further this charming plan, he doffed his symbols of
royalty, put off his crown, laid aside his scepter, and assured us that
he would not wear them again, except when we landed; and not
invariably, then.

“Are we not all now friends and companions?” he said. “So companions
and friends let us be. I unbend my bow; do ye likewise.”

“But are we not to be dignified?” asked Babbalanja.

“If dignity be free and natural, be as dignified as you please; but
away with rigidities.”

“Away they go,” said Babbalanja; “and, my lord, now that you mind me of
it, I have often thought, that it is all folly and vanity for any man
to attempt a dignified carriage. Why, my lord,”—frankly crossing his
legs where he lay—“the king, who receives his ambassadors with a
majestic toss of the head, may have just recovered from the tooth-
ache. That thought should cant over the spine he bears so bravely.”

“Have a care, sir! there is a king within hearing.”

“Pardon, my lord; I was merely availing myself of the immunity bestowed
upon the company. Hereafter, permit a subject to rebel against your
sociable decrees. I will not be so frank any more.”

“Well put, Babbalanja; come nearer; here, cross your legs by mine; you
have risen a cubit in my regard. Vee-Vee, bring us that gourd of wine;
so, pass it round with the cups. Now, Yoomy, a song!”

And a song was sung.

And thus did we sail; pleasantly reclining on the mats stretched out
beneath the canopied howdah.

At length, we drew nigh to a rock, called Pella, or The Theft. A high,
green crag, toppling over its base, and flinging a cavernous shadow
upon the lagoon beneath, bubbling with the moisture that dropped.

Passing under this cliff was like finding yourself, as some sea-
hunters unexpectedly have, beneath the open, upper jaw of a whale;
which, descending, infallibly entombs you. But familiar with the rock,
our paddlers only threw back their heads, to catch the cool, pleasant
tricklings from the mosses above.

Wiping away several glittering beads from his beard, old Mohi turning
round where he sat, just outside the canopy, solemnly affirmed, that
the drinking of that water had cured many a man of ambition.

“How so, old man?” demanded Media.

“Because of its passing through the ashes of ten kings, of yore buried
in a sepulcher, hewn in the heart of the rock.”

“Mighty kings, and famous, doubtless,” said Babbalanja, “whose bones
were thought worthy of so noble and enduring as urn. Pray, Mohi, their
names and terrible deeds.”

“Alas! their sepulcher only remains.”

“And, no doubt, like many others, they made that sepul for themselves.
They sleep sound, my word for it, old man. But I very much question,
if, were the rock rent, any ashes would be found. Mohi, I deny that
those kings ever had any bones to bury.”

“Why, Babbalanja,” said Media, “since you intimate that they never had
ghosts to give up, you ignore them in toto; denying the very fact of
their being even defunct.”

“Ten thousand pardons, my lord, no such discourtesy would I do the
anonymous memory of the illustrious dead. But whether they ever lived
or not, it is all the same with them now. Yet, grant that they lived;
then, if death be a deaf-and-dumb death, a triumphal procession over
their graves would concern them not. If a birth into brightness, then
Mardi must seem to them the most trivial of reminiscences. Or, perhaps,
theirs may be an utter lapse of memory concerning sublunary things; and
they themselves be not themselves, as the butterfly is not the larva.”

Said Yoomy, “Then, Babbalanja, you account that a fit illustration of
the miraculous change to be wrought in man after death?”

“No; for the analogy has an unsatisfactory end. From its chrysalis
state, the silkworm but becomes a moth, that very quickly expires. Its
longest existence is as a worm. All vanity, vanity, Yoomy, to seek in
nature for positive warranty to these aspirations of ours. Through all
her provinces, nature seems to promise immortality to life, but
destruction to beings. Or, as old Bardianna has it, if not against us,
nature is not for us.”

Said Media, rising, “Babbalanja, you have indeed put aside the
courtier; talking of worms and caterpillars to me, a king and a demi-
god! To renown, for your theme: a more agreeable topic.”

“Pardon, once again, my lord. And since you will, let us discourse of
that subject. First, I lay it down for an indubitable maxim, that in
itself all posthumous renown, which is the only renown, is valueless.
Be not offended, my lord. To the nobly ambitious, renown hereafter may
be something to anticipate. But analyzed, that feverish typhoid feeling
of theirs may be nothing more than a flickering fancy, that now, while
living, they are recognized as those who will be as famous in their
shrouds, as in their girdles.”

Said Yoomy, “But those great and good deeds, Babbalanja, of which the
philosophers so often discourse: must it not be sweet to believe that
their memory will long survive us; and we ourselves in them?”

“I speak now,” said Babbalanja, “of the ravening for fame which even
appeased, like thirst slaked in the desert, yields no felicity, but
only relief; and which discriminates not in aught that will satisfy its
cravings. But let me resume. Not an hour ago, Braid-Beard was telling
us that story of prince Ottimo, who inodorous while living, expressed
much delight at the prospect of being perfumed and embalmed, when dead.
But was not Ottimo the most eccentric of mortals? For few men issue
orders for their shrouds, to inspect their quality beforehand. Far more
anxious are they about the texture of the sheets in which their living
limbs lie. And, my lord, with some rare exceptions, does not all Mardi,
by its actions, declare, that it is far better to be notorious now,
than famous hereafter?”

“A base sentiment, my lord,” said Yoomy. “Did not poor Bonja, the
unappreciated poet, console himself for the neglect of his
contemporaries, by inspiriting thoughts of the future?”

“In plain words by bethinking him of the glorious harvest of bravos his
ghost would reap for him,” said Babbalanja; “but Banjo,—Bonjo,—Binjo,—I
never heard of him.”

“Nor I,” said Mohi.

“Nor I,” said Media.

“Poor fellow!” cried Babbalanja; “I fear me his harvest is not yet
ripe.”

“Alas!” cried Yoomy; “he died more than a century ago.”

“But now that you speak of unappreciated poets, Yoomy,” said
Babbalanja, “Shall I give you a piece of my mind?” “Do,” said Mohi,
stroking his beard.

“He, who on all hands passes for a cypher to-day, if at all remembered
hereafter, will be sure to pass for the same. For there is more
likelihood of being overrated while living, than of being underrated
when dead. And to insure your fame, you must die.”

“A rather discouraging thought for your race. But answer: I assume that
King Media is but a mortal like you; now, how may I best perpetuate my
name?”

Long pondered Babbalanja; then said, “Carve it, my lord, deep into a
ponderous stone, and sink it, face downward, into the sea; for the
unseen foundations of the deep are more enduring than the palpable tops
of the mountains.”

Sailing past Pella, we gained a view of its farther side; and seated in
a lofty cleft, beheld a lonely fisherman; solitary as a seal on an
iceberg; his motionless line in the water.

“What recks he of the ten kings,” said Babbalanja.

“Mohi,” said Media, “methinks there is another tradition concerning
that rock: let us have it.”

“In old times of genii and giants, there dwelt in barren lands, not
very remote from our outer reef, but since submerged, a band of evil-
minded, envious goblins, furlongs in stature, and with immeasurable
arms; who from time to time cast covetous glances upon our blooming
isles. Long they lusted; till at last, they waded through the sea,
strode over the reef, and seizing the nearest islet, rolled it over and
over, toward an adjoining outlet.

“But the task was hard; and day-break surprised them in the midst of
their audacious thieving; while in the very act of giving the devoted
land another doughty surge and Somerset. Leaving it bottom upward and
midway poised, gardens under water, its foundations in air, they
precipitately fled; in their great haste, deserting a comrade, vainly
struggling to liberate his foot caught beneath the overturned land.”

“This poor fellow now raised such an outcry, as to awaken the god Upi,
or the Archer, stretched out on a long cloud in the East; who forthwith
resolved to make an example of the unwilling lingerer. Snatching his
bow, he let fly an arrow. But overshooting its mark, it pierced through
and through, the lofty promontory of a neighboring island; making an
arch in it, which remaineth even unto this day. A second arrow,
however, accomplished its errand: the slain giant sinking prone to the
bottom.”

“And now,” added Mohi, “glance over the gunwale, and you will see his
remains petrified into white ribs of coral.”

“Ay, there they are,” said Yoomy, looking down into the water where
they gleamed. “A fanciful legend, Braid-beard.”

“Very entertaining,” said Media.

“Even so,” said Babbalanja. “But perhaps we lost time in listening to
it; for though we know it, we are none the wiser.”

“Be not a cynic,” said Media. “No pastime is lost time.”

Musing a moment, Babbalanja replied, “My lord, that maxim may be good
as it stands; but had you made six words of it, instead of six
syllables, you had uttered a better and a deeper.”




CHAPTER LXX.
The Minstrel Leads Off With A Paddle-Song; And A Message Is Received
From Abroad


From seaward now came a breeze so blithesome and fresh, that it made us
impatient of Babbalanja’s philosophy, and Mohi’s incredible legends.
One and all, we called upon the minstrel Yoomy to give us something in
unison with the spirited waves wide-foaming around us.

“If my lord will permit, we will give Taji the Paddle-Chant of the
warriors of King Bello.”

“By all means,” said Media.

So the three canoes were brought side to side; their sails rolled up;
and paddles in hand, our paddlers seated themselves sideways on the
gunwales; Yoomy, as leader, occupying the place of the foremast, or
Bow-Paddler of the royal barge.

Whereupon the six rows of paddle-blades being uplifted, and every eye
on the minstrel, this song was sung, with actions corresponding; the
canoes at last shooting through the water, with a violent roll.

        (All.)
    Thrice waved on high,
    Our paddles fly:
Thrice round the head, thrice dropt to feet:
    And then well timed,
    Of one stout mind,
All fall, and back the waters heap!

        (Bow-Paddler.)
    Who lifts this chant?
    Who sounds this vaunt?

        (All.)
The wild sea song, to the billows’ throng,
    Rising, falling,
    Hoarsely calling,
Now high, now low, as fast we go,
Fast on our flying foe!

        (Bow-Paddler.)
    Who lifts this chant?
    Who sounds this vaunt?

        (All.)
Dip, dip, in the brine our paddles dip,
Dip, dip, the fins of our swimming ship!
    How the waters part,
    As on we dart;
      Our sharp prows fly,
      And curl on high,
As the upright fin of the rushing shark,
Rushing fast and far on his flying mark!
    Like him we prey;
    Like him we slay;
      Swim on the fog,
      Our prow a blow!

        (Bow-Paddler.)
    Who lifts this chant?
    Who sounds this vaunt?

        (All.)
Heap back; heap back; the waters back!
Pile them high astern, in billows black;
    Till we leave our wake,
    In the slope we make;
    And rush and ride,
    On the torrent’s tide!


Here we were overtaken by a swift gliding canoe, which, bearing down
upon us before the wind, lowered its sail when close by: its occupants
signing our paddlers to desist.

I started.

The strangers were three hooded damsels the enigmatical Queen Hautia’s
heralds.

Their pursuit surprised and perplexed me. Nor was there wanting a vague
feeling of alarm to heighten these emotions. But perhaps I was
mistaken, and this time they meant not me.

Seated in the prow, the foremost waved her Iris flag. Cried Yoomy,
“Some message! Taji, that Iris points to you.”

It was then, I first divined, that some meaning must have lurked in
those flowers they had twice brought me before.

The second damsel now flung over to me Circe flowers; then, a faded
jonquil, buried in a tuft of wormwood leaves.

The third sat in the shallop’s stern, and as it glided from us, thrice
waved oleanders.

“What dumb show is this?” cried Media. “But it looks like poetry:
minstrel, you should know.”

“Interpret then,” said I.

“Shall I, then, be your Flora’s flute, and Hautia’s dragoman? Held
aloft, the Iris signified a message. These purple-woven Circe flowers
mean that some spell is weaving. That golden, pining jonquil, which you
hold, buried in those wormwood leaves, says plainly to you—Bitter love
in absence.”

Said Media, “Well done, Taji, you have killed a queen.” “Yet no Queen
Hautia have these eyes beheld.”

Said Babbalanja, “The thrice waved oleanders, Yoomy; what meant they?”

“Beware—beware—beware.”

“Then that, at least, seems kindly meant,” said Babbalanja; “Taji,
beware of Hautia.”




CHAPTER LXXI.
They Land Upon The Island Of Juam


Crossing the lagoon, our course now lay along the reef to Juam; a name
bestowed upon one of the largest islands hereabout; and also,
collectively, upon several wooded isles engulfing it, which together
were known as the dominions of one monarch. That monarch was Donjalolo.
Just turned of twenty-five, he was accounted not only the handsomest
man in his dominions, but throughout the lagoon. His comeliness,
however, was so feminine, that he was sometimes called “Fonoo,” or the
Girl.

Our first view of Juam was imposing. A dark green pile of cliffs,
towering some one hundred toises; at top, presenting a range of steep,
gable-pointed projections; as if some Titanic hammer and chisel had
shaped the mass.

Sailing nearer, we perceived an extraordinary rolling of the sea; which
bursting into the lagoon through an adjoining breach in the reef,
surged toward Juam in enormous billows. At last, dashing against the
wall of the cliff; they played there in unceasing fountains. But under
the brow of a beetling crag, the spray came and went unequally. There,
the blue billows seemed swallowed up, and lost.

Right regally was Juam guarded. For, at this point, the rock was
pierced by a cave, into which the great waves chased each other like
lions; after a hollow, subterraneous roaring issuing forth with manes
disheveled.

Cautiously evading the dangerous currents here ruffling the lagoon, we
rounded the wall of cliff; and shot upon a smooth expanse; on one side,
hemmed in by the long, verdent, northern shore of Juam; and across the
water, sentineled by its tributary islets.

With sonorous Vee-Vee in the shark’s mouth, we swept toward the beach,
tumultuous with a throng.

Our canoes were secured. And surrounded by eager glances, we passed the
lower ends of several populous valleys; and crossing a wide, open
meadow, gradually ascending, came to a range of light-green bluffs.
Here, we wended our way down a narrow defile, almost cleaving this
quarter of the island to its base. Black crags frowned overhead: among
them the shouts of the Islanders reverberated. Yet steeper grew the
defile, and more overhanging the crags till at last, the keystone of
the arch seemed dropped into its place. We found ourselves in a
subterranean tunnel, dimly lighted by a span of white day at the end.

Emerging, what a scene was revealed! All round, embracing a circuit of
some three leagues, stood heights inaccessible, here and there, forming
buttresses, sheltering deep recesses between. The bosom of the place
was vivid with verdure.

Shining aslant into this wild hollow, the afternoon sun lighted up its
eastern side with tints of gold. But opposite, brooded a somber shadow,
double-shading the secret places between the salient spurs of the
mountains. Thus cut in twain by masses of day and night, it seemed as
if some Last Judgment had been enacted in the glen.

No sooner did we emerge from the defile, than we became sensible of a
dull, jarring sound; and Yoomy was almost tempted to turn and flee,
when informed that the sea-cavern, whose mouth we had passed, was
believed to penetrate deep into the opposite hills; and that the
surface of the amphitheater was depressed beneath that of the lagoon.
But all over the lowermost hillsides, and sloping into the glen, stood
grand old groves; still and stately, as if no insolent waves were
throbbing in the mountain’s heart.

Such was Willamilla, the hereditary abode of the young monarch of Juam.

Was Yillah immured in this strange retreat? But from those around us
naught could we learn.

Our attention was now directed to the habitations of the glen;
comprised in two handsome villages; one to the west, the other to the
east; both stretching along the base of the cliffs.

Said Media, “Had we arrived at Willamilla in the morning, we had found
Donjalolo and his court in the eastern village; but being afternoon, we
must travel farther, and seek him in his western retreat; for that is
now in the shade.”

Wending our way, Media added, that aside from his elevated station as a
monarch, Donjalolo was famed for many uncommon traits; but more
especially for certain peculiar deprivations, under which he labored.

Whereupon Braid-Beard unrolled his old chronicles; and regaled us with
the history, which will be found in the following chapter.




CHAPTER LXXII.
A Book From The Chronicles Of Mohi


Many ages ago, there reigned in Juam a king called Teei. This Teei’s
succession to the sovereignty was long disputed by his brother Marjora;
who at last rallying round him an army, after many vicissitudes,
defeated the unfortunate monarch in a stout fight of clubs on the
beach.

In those days, Willamilla during a certain period of the year was a
place set apart for royal games and diversions; and was furnished with
suitable accommodations for king and court. From its peculiar position,
moreover, it was regarded as the last stronghold of the Juam monarchy:
in remote times having twice withstood the most desperate assaults from
without. And when Roonoonoo, a famous upstart, sought to subdue all the
isles in this part of the Archipelago, it was to Willamilla that the
banded kings had repaired to take counsel together; and while there
conferring, were surprised at the sudden onslaught of Roonoonoo in
person. But in the end, the rebel was captured, he and all his army,
and impaled on the tops of the hills.

Now, defeated and fleeing for his life, Teei with his surviving
followers was driven across the plain toward the mountains. But to cut
him off from all escape to inland Willamilla, Marjora dispatched a
fleet band of warriors to occupy the entrance of the defile.
Nevertheless, Teei the pursued ran faster than his pursuers; first
gained the spot; and with his chiefs, fled swiftly down the gorge,
closely hunted by Marjora’s men. But arriving at the further end, they
in vain sought to defend it. And after much desperate fighting, the
main body of the foe corning up with great slaughter the fugitives were
driven into the glen.

They ran to the opposite wall of cliff; where turning, they fought at
bay, blood for blood, and life for life, till at last, overwhelmed by
numbers, they were all put to the point of the spear.

With fratricidal hate, singled out by the ferocious Marjora, Teei fell
by that brother’s hand. When stripping from the body the regal girdle,
the victor wound it round his own loins; thus proclaiming himself king
over Juam.

Long torn by this intestine war, the island acquiesced in the new
sovereignty. But at length a sacred oracle declared, that since the
conqueror had slain his brother in deep Willamilla, so that Teei never
more issued from that refuge of death; therefore, the same fate should
be Marjora’s; for never, thenceforth, from that glen, should he go
forth; neither Marjora; nor any son of his girdled loins; nor his son’s
sons; nor the uttermost scion of his race.

But except this denunciation, naught was denounced against the usurper;
who, mindful of the tenure by which he reigned, ruled over the island
for many moons; at his death bequeathing the girdle to his son.

In those days, the wildest superstitions concerning the interference of
the gods in things temporal, prevailed to a much greater extent than at
present. Hence Marjora himself, called sometimes in the traditions of
the island, The-Heart-of-Black-Coral, even unscrupulous Marjora had
quailed before the oracle. “He bowed his head,” say the legends. Nor
was it then questioned, by his most devoted adherents, that had he
dared to act counter to that edict, he had dropped dead, the very
instant he went under the shadow of the defile. This persuasion also
guided the conduct of the son of Marjora, and that of his grandson.

But there at last came to pass a change in the popular fancies
concerning this ancient anathema. The penalty denounced against the
posterity of the usurper should they issue from the glen, came to be
regarded as only applicable to an invested monarch, not to his
relatives, or heirs.

A most favorable construction of the ban; for all those related to the
king, freely passed in and out of Willamilla.

From the time of the usurpation, there had always been observed a
certain ceremony upon investing the heir to the sovereignty with the
girdle of Teei. Upon these occasions, the chief priests of the island
were present, acting an important part. For the space of as many days,
as there had reigned kings of Marjora’s dynasty, the inner mouth of the
defile remained sealed; the new monarch placing the last stone in the
gap. This symbolized his relinquishment forever of all purpose of
passing out of the glen. And without this observance, was no king
girdled in Juam.

It was likewise an invariable custom, for the heir to receive the regal
investiture immediately upon the decease of his sire. No delay was
permitted. And instantly upon being girdled, he proceeded to take part
in the ceremony of closing the cave; his predecessor yet remaining
uninterred on the purple mat where he died.

In the history of the island, three instances were recorded; wherein,
upon the vacation of the sovereignty, the immediate heir had
voluntarily renounced all claim to the succession, rather than
surrender the privilege of roving, to which he had been entitled, as a
prince of the blood.

Said Rani, one of these young princes, in reply to the remonstrances of
his friends, “What! shall I be a king, only to be a slave? Teei’s
girdle would clasp my waist less tightly, than my soul would be banded
by the mountains of Willamilla. A subject, I am free. No slave in Juam
but its king; for all the tassels round his loins.”

To guard against a similar resolution in the mind of his only son, the
wise sire of Donjalolo, ardently desirous of perpetuating his dignities
in a child so well beloved, had from his earliest infancy, restrained
the boy from passing out of the glen, to contract in the free air of
the Archipelago, tastes and predilections fatal to the inheritance of
the girdle.

But as he grew in years, so impatient became young Donjalolo of the
king his father’s watchfulness over him, though hitherto a most dutiful
son, that at last he was prevailed upon by his youthful companions to
appoint a day, on which to go abroad, and visit Mardi. Hearing this
determination, the old king sought to vanquish it. But in vain. And
early on the morning of the day, that Donjalolo was to set out, he
swallowed poison, and died; in order to force his son into the instant
assumption of the honors thus suddenly inherited.

The event, but not its dreadful circumstances, was communicated to the
prince; as with a gay party of young chiefs, he was about to enter the
mouth of the defile.

“My sire dead!” cried Donjalolo. “So sudden, it seems a bolt from
Heaven.” And bursting into exclamations of grief, he wept upon the
bosom of Talara his friend.

But starting from his side:—“My fate converges to a point. If I but
cross that shadow, my kingdom is lost. One lifting of my foot, and the
girdle goes to my proud uncle Darfi, who would so joy to be my master.
Haughty Dwarf! Oh Oro! would that I had ere this passed thee, fatal
cavern; and seen for myself, what outer Mardi is. Say ye true,
comrades, that Willamilla is less lovely than the valleys without? that
there is bright light in the eyes of the maidens of Mina? and wisdom in
the hearts of the old priests of Maramma; that it is pleasant to tread
the green earth where you will; and breathe the free ocean air? Would,
oh would, that I were but the least of yonder sun-clouds, that look
down alike on Willamilla and all places besides, that I might determine
aright. Yet why do I pause? did not Rani, and Atama, and Mardonna, my
ancestors, each see for himself, free Mardi; and did they not fly the
proffered girdle; choosing rather to be free to come and go, than bury
themselves forever in this fatal glen? Oh Mardi! Mardi! art thou then
so fair to see? Is liberty a thing so glorious? Yet can I be no king,
and behold thee! Too late, too late, to view thy charms and then
return. My sire! my sire! thou hast wrung my heart with this agony of
doubt. Tell me, comrades,—for ye have seen it,—is Mardi sweeter to
behold, than it is royal to reign over Juam? Silent, are ye? Knowing
what ye do, were ye me, would ye be kings? Tell me, Talara.—No king: no
king:—that were to obey, and not command. And none hath Donjalolo ere
obeyed but the king his father. A king, and my voice may be heard in
farthest Mardi, though I abide in narrow Willamilla. My sire! my sire!
Ye flying clouds, what look ye down upon? Tell me, what ye see abroad?
Methinks sweet spices breathe from out the cave.”

“Hail, Donjalolo, King of Juam,” now sounded with acclamations from the
groves.

Starting, the young prince beheld a multitude approaching: warriors
with spears, and maidens with flowers; and Kubla, a priest, lifting on
high the tasseled girdle of Teei, and waving it toward him.

The young chiefs fell back. Kubla, advancing, came close to the prince,
and unclasping the badge of royalty, exclaimed, “Donjalolo, this
instant it is king or subject with thee: wilt thou be girdled monarch?”

Gazing one moment up the dark defile, then staring vacantly, Donjalolo
turned and met the eager gaze of Darfi. Stripping off his mantle, the
next instant he was a king.

Loud shouted the multitude, and exulted; but after mutely assisting at
the closing of the cavern, the new-girdled monarch retired sadly to his
dwelling, and was not seen again for many days.




CHAPTER LXXIII.
Something More Of The Prince


Previous to recording our stay in his dominions, it only remains to be
related of Donjalolo, that after assuming the girdle, a change came
over him.

During the lifetime of his father, he had been famed for his temperance
and discretion. But when Mardi was forever shut out; and he remembered
the law of his isle, interdicting abdication to its kings; he gradually
fell into desperate courses, to drown the emotions at times distracting
him.

His generous spirit thirsting after some energetic career, found itself
narrowed down within the little glen of Willamilla, where ardent
impulses seemed idle. But these are hard to die; and repulsed all
round, recoil upon themselves.

So with Donjalolo; who, in many a riotous scene, wasted the powers
which might have compassed the noblest designs.

Not many years had elapsed since the death of the king, his father. But
the still youthful prince was no longer the bright-eyed and elastic boy
who at the dawn of day had sallied out to behold the landscapes of the
neighboring isles.

Not more effeminate Sardanapalus, than he. And, at intervals, he was
the victim of unaccountable vagaries; haunted by specters, and beckoned
to by the ghosts of his sires.

At times, loathing his vicious pursuits, which brought him no solid
satisfaction, but ever filled him with final disgust, he would resolve
to amend his ways; solacing himself for his bitter captivity, by the
society of the wise and discreet.

But brief the interval of repentance. Anew, he burst into excesses, a
hundred fold more insane than ever.

Thus vacillating between virtue and vice; to neither constant, and
upbraided by both; his mind, like his person in the glen, was
continually passing and repassing between opposite extremes.




CHAPTER LXXIV.
Advancing Deeper Into The Vale, They Encounter Donjalolo


From the mouth of the cavern, a broad shaded way over-arched by
fraternal trees embracing in mid-air, conducted us to a cross-path, on
either hand leading to the opposite cliffs, shading the twin villages
before mentioned.

Level as a meadow, was the bosom of the glen. Here, nodding with green
orchards of the Bread-fruit and the Palm; there, flashing with golden
plantations of the Banana. Emerging from these, we came out upon a
grassy mead, skirting a projection of the mountain. And soon we crossed
a bridge of boughs, spanning a trench, thickly planted with roots of
the Tara, like alligators, or Hollanders, reveling in the soft
alluvial. Strolling on, the wild beauty of the mountains excited our
attention. The topmost crags poured over with vines; which, undulating
in the air, seemed leafy cascades; their sources the upland groves.

Midway up the precipice, along a shelf of rock, sprouted the
multitudinous roots of an apparently trunkless tree. Shooting from
under the shallow soil, they spread all over the rocks below, covering
them with an intricate net-work. While far aloft, great boughs—each a
copse—clambered to the very summit of the mountain; then bending over,
struck anew into the soil; forming along the verge an interminable
colonnade; all manner of antic architecture standing against the sky.

According to Mohi, this tree was truly wonderful; its seed having been
dropped from the moon; where were plenty more similar forests, causing
the dark spots on its surface.

Here and there, the cool fluid in the veins of the mountains gushed
forth in living springs; their waters received in green mossy tanks,
half buried in grasses.

In one place, a considerable stream, bounding far out from a wooded
height, ere reaching the ground was dispersed in a wide misty shower,
falling so far from the base of the cliff; that walking close
underneath, you felt little moisture. Passing this fall of vapors, we
spied many Islanders taking a bath.

But what is yonder swaying of the foliage? And what now issues forth,
like a habitation astir? Donjalolo drawing nigh to his guests.

He came in a fair sedan; a bower, resting upon three long, parallel
poles, borne by thirty men, gayly attired; five at each pole-end.
Decked with dyed tappas, and looped with garlands of newly-plucked
flowers, from which, at every step, the fragrant petals were blown;
with a sumptuous, elastic motion the gay sedan came on; leaving behind
it a long, rosy wake of fluttering leaves and odors.

Drawing near, it revealed a slender, enervate youth, of pallid beauty,
reclining upon a crimson mat, near the festooned arch of the bower. His
anointed head was resting against the bosom of a girl; another stirred
the air, with a fan of Pintado plumes. The pupils of his eyes were as
floating isles in the sea. In a soft low tone he murmured “Media!”

The bearers paused; and Media advancing; the Island Kings bowed their
foreheads together.

Through tubes ignited at the end, Donjaloln’s reclining attendants now
blew an aromatic incense around him. These were composed of the
stimulating leaves of the “Aina,” mixed with the long yellow blades of
a sweet-scented upland grass; forming a hollow stem. In general, the
agreeable fumes of the “Aina” were created by one’s own inhalations;
but Donjalolo deeming the solace too dearly purchased by any exertion
of the royal lungs, regaled himself through those of his attendants,
whose lips were as moss-rose buds after a shower.

In silence the young prince now eyed us attentively; meanwhile gently
waving his hand, to obtain a better view through the wreaths of vapor.
He was about to address us, when chancing to catch a glimpse of Samoa,
he suddenly started; averted his glance; and wildly commanded the
warrior out of sight. Upon this, his attendants would have soothed him;
and Media desired the Upoluan to withdraw.

While we were yet lost in wonder at this scene, Donjalolo, with eyes
closed, fell back into the arms of his damsels. Recovering, he fetched
a deep sigh, and gazed vacantly around.

It seems, that he had fancied Samoa the noon-day specter of his
ancestor Marjora; the usurper having been deprived of an arm in the
battle which gained him the girdle. Poor prince: this was one of those
crazy conceits, so puzzling to his subjects.

Media now hastened to assure Donjalolo, that Samoa, though no cherub to
behold, was good flesh and blood, nevertheless. And soon the king
unconcernedly gazed; his monomania having departed as a dream.

But still suffering from the effects of an overnight feast, he
presently murmured forth a desire to be left to his women; adding that
his people would not fail to provide for the entertainment of his
guests.

The curtains of the sedan were now drawn; and soon it disappeared in
the groves. Journeying on, ere long we arrived at the western side of
the glen; where one of the many little arbors scattered among the
trees, was assigned for our abode. Here, we reclined to an agreeable
repast. After which, we strolled forth to view the valley at large;
more especially the far-famed palaces of the prince.




CHAPTER LXXV.
Time And Temples


In the oriental Pilgrimage of the pious old Purchas, and in the fine
old folio Voyages of Hakluyt, Thevenot, Ramusio, and De Bry, we read of
many glorious old Asiatic temples, very long in erecting. And veracious
Gaudentia di Lucca hath a wondrous narration of the time consumed in
rearing that mighty three-hundred-and-seventy-five- pillared Temple of
the Year, somewhere beyond Libya; whereof, the columns did signify
days, and all round fronted upon concentric zones of palaces, cross-cut
by twelve grand avenues symbolizing the signs of the zodiac, all
radiating from the sun-dome in their midst. And in that wild eastern
tale of his, Marco Polo tells us, how the Great Mogul began him a
pleasure-palace on so imperial a scale, that his grandson had much ado
to complete it.

But no matter for marveling all this: great towers take time to
construct.

And so of all else.

And that which long endures full-fledged, must have long lain in the
germ. And duration is not of the future, but of the past; and eternity
is eternal, because it has been, and though a strong new monument be
builded to-day, it only is lasting because its blocks are old as the
sun. It is not the Pyramids that are ancient, but the eternal granite
whereof they are made; which had been equally ancient though yet in the
quarry. For to make an eternity, we must build with eternities; whence,
the vanity of the cry for any thing alike durable and new; and the
folly of the reproach—Your granite hath come from the old-fashioned
hills. For we are not gods and creators; and the controversialists have
debated, whether indeed the All-Plastic Power itself can do more than
mold. In all the universe is but one original; and the very suns must
to their source for their fire; and we Prometheuses must to them for
ours; which, when had, only perpetual Vestal tending will keep alive.

But let us back from fire to store. No fine firm fabric ever yet grew
like a gourd. Nero’s House of Gold was not raised in a day; nor the
Mexican House of the Sun; nor the Alhambra; nor the Escurial; nor
Titus’s Amphitheater; nor the Illinois Mounds; nor Diana’s great
columns at Ephesus; nor Pompey’s proud Pillar; nor the Parthenon; nor
the Altar of Belus; nor Stonehenge; nor Solomon’s Temple; nor Tadmor’s
towers; nor Susa’s bastions; nor Persepolis’ pediments. Round and
round, the Moorish turret at Seville was not wound heavenward in the
revolution of a day; and from its first founding, five hundred years
did circle, ere Strasbourg’s great spire lifted its five hundred feet
into the air. No: nor were the great grottos of Elephanta hewn out in
an hour; nor did the Troglodytes dig Kentucky’s Mammoth Cave in a sun;
nor that of Trophonius, nor Antiparos; nor the Giant’s Causeway. Nor
were the subterranean arched sewers of Etruria channeled in a trice;
nor the airy arched aqueducts of Nerva thrown over their values in the
ides of a month. Nor was Virginia’s Natural Bridge worn under in a
year; nor, in geology, were the eternal Grampians upheaved in an age.
And who shall count the cycles that revolved ere earth’s interior
sedimentary strata were crystalized into stone. Nor Peak of Piko, nor
Teneriffe, were chiseled into obelisks in a decade; nor had Mount Athos
been turned into Alexander’s statue so soon. And the bower of
Artaxerxes took a whole Persian summer to grow; and the Czar’s Ice
Palace a long Muscovite winter to congéal. No, no: nor was the Pyramid
of Cheops masoned in a month; though, once built, the sands left by the
deluge might not have submerged such a pile. Nor were the broad boughs
of Charles’ Oak grown in a spring; though they outlived the royal
dynasties of Tudor and Stuart. Nor were the parts of the great Iliad
put together in haste; though old Homer’s temple shall lift up its
dome, when St. Peter’s is a legend. Even man himself lives months ere
his Maker deems him fit to be born; and ere his proud shaft gains its
full stature, twenty-one long Julian years must elapse. And his whole
mortal life brings not his immortal soul to maturity; nor will all
eternity perfect him. Yea, with uttermost reverence, as to human
understanding, increase of dominion seems increase of power; and day by
day new planets are being added to elder-born Saturn, even as six
thousand years ago our own Earth made one more in this system; so, in
incident, not in essence, may the Infinite himself be not less than
more infinite now, than when old Aldebaran rolled forth from his hand.
And if time was, when this round Earth, which to innumerable mortals
has seemed an empire never to be wholly explored; which, in its seas,
concealed all the Indies over four thousand five hundred years; if time
was, when this great quarry of Assyrias and Romes was not extant; then,
time may have been, when the whole material universe lived its Dark
Ages; yea, when the Ineffable Silence, proceeding from its unimaginable
remoteness, espied it as an isle in the sea. And herein is no
derogation. For the Immeasurable’s altitude is not heightened by the
arches of Mahomet’s heavens; and were all space a vacuum, yet would it
be a fullness; for to Himself His own universe is He.

Thus deeper and deeper into Time’s endless tunnel, does the winged
soul, like a night-hawk, wend her wild way; and finds eternities before
and behind; and her last limit is her everlasting beginning.

But sent over the broad flooded sphere, even Noah’s dove came back, and
perched on his hand. So comes back my spirit to me, and folds up her
wings.

Thus, then, though Time be the mightiest of Alarics, yet is he the
mightiest mason of all. And a tutor, and a counselor, and a physician,
and a scribe, and a poet, and a sage, and a king.

Yea, and a gardener, as ere long will be shown.

But first must we return to the glen.




CHAPTER LXXVI.
A Pleasant Place For A Lounge


Whether the hard condition of their kingly state, very naturally
demanding some luxurious requital, prevailed upon the monarchs of Juam
to house themselves so delightfully as they did; whether buried alive
in their glen, they sought to center therein a secret world of
enjoyment; however it may have been, throughout the Archipelago this
saying was a proverb—“You are lodged like the king in Willamilla.”
Hereby was expressed the utmost sumptuousness of a palace.

A well warranted saying; for of all the bright places, where my soul
loves to linger, the haunts of Donjalolo are most delicious.

In the eastern quarter of the glen was the House of the Morning. This
fanciful palace was raised upon a natural mound, many rods square,
almost completely filling up a deep recess between deep-green and
projecting cliffs, overlooking many abodes distributed in the shadows
of the groves beyond.

Now, if it indeed be, that from the time employed in its construction,
any just notion may be formed of the stateliness of an edifice, it must
needs be determined, that this retreat of Donjalolo could not be
otherwise than imposing.

Full five hundred moons was the palace in completing; for by some
architectural arborist, its quadrangular foundations had been laid in
seed-cocoanuts, requiring that period to sprout up into pillars. In
front, these were horizontally connected, by elaborately carved beams,
of a scarlet hue, inserted into the vital wood; which, swelling out,
and over lapping, firmly secured them. The beams supported the rafters,
inclining from the rear; while over the aromatic grasses covering the
roof, waved the tufted tops of the Palms, green capitals to their dusky
shafts.

Through and through this vibrating verdure, bright birds flitted and
sang; the scented and variegated thatch seemed a hanging-garden; and
between it and the Palm tops, was leaf-hung an arbor in the air.

Without these columns, stood a second and third colonnade, forming the
most beautiful bowers; advancing through which, you fancied that the
palace beyond must be chambered in a fountain, or frozen in a crystal.
Three sparkling rivulets flowing from the heights were led across its
summit, through great trunks half buried in the thatch; and emptying
into a sculptured channel, running along the eaves, poured over in one
wide sheet, plaited and transparent. Received into a basin beneath,
they were thence conducted down the vale.

The sides of the palace were hedged by Diomi bushes bearing a flower,
from its perfume, called Lenora, or Sweet Breath; and within these
odorous hedges, were heavy piles of mats, richly dyed and embroidered.

Here lounging of a glowing noon, the plaited cascade playing, the
verdure waving, and the birds melodious, it was hard to say, whether
you were an inmate of a garden in the glen, or a grotto in the sea.

But enough for the nonce, of the House of the Morning. Cross we the
hollow, to the House of the Afternoon.




CHAPTER LXXVII.
The House Of The Afternoon


For the most part, the House of the Afternoon was but a wing built
against a mansion wrought by the hand of Nature herself; a grotto
running into the side of the mountain. From high over the mouth of this
grotto, sloped a long arbor, supported by great blocks of stone, rudely
chiseled into the likeness of idols, each bearing a carved lizard on
its chest: a sergeant’s guard of the gods condescendingly doing duty as
posts.

From the grotto thus vestibuled, issued hilariously forth the most
considerable stream of the glen; which, seemingly overjoyed to find
daylight in Willamilla, sprang into the arbor with a cheery, white
bound. But its youthful enthusiasm was soon repressed; its waters being
caught in a large stone basin, scooped out of the natural rock; whence,
staid and decorous, they traversed sundry moats; at last meandering
away, to join floods with the streams trained to do service at the
other end of the vale.

Truant streams: the livelong day wending their loitering path to the
subterraneous outlet, flowing into which, they disappeared. But no
wonder they loitered; passing such ravishing landscapes. Thus with
life: man bounds out of night; runs and babbles in the sun; then
returns to his darkness again; though, peradventure, once more to
emerge.

But the grotto was not a mere outlet to the stream. Flowing through a
dark flume in the rock, on both sides it left a dry, elevated shelf, to
which you ascend from the arbor by three artificially-wrought steps,
sideways disposed, to avoid the spray of the rejoicing cataract.
Mounting these, and pursuing the edge of the flume, the grotto
gradually expands and heightens; your way lighted by rays in the inner
distance. At last you come to a lofty subterraneous dome, lit from
above by a cleft in the mountain; while full before you, in the
opposite wall, from a low, black arch, midway up, and inaccessible, the
stream, with a hollow ring and a dash, falls in a long, snowy column
into a bottomless pool, whence, after many an eddy and whirl, it
entered the flume, and away with a rush. Half hidden from view by an
overhanging brow of the rock, the white fall looked like the sheeted
ghost of the grotto.

Yet gallantly bedecked was the cave, as any old armorial hall hung
round with banners and arras. Streaming from the cleft, vines swung in
the air; or crawled along the rocks, wherever a tendril could be fixed.
High up, their leaves were green; but lower down, they were shriveled;
and dyed of many colors; and tattered and torn with much rustling; as
old banners again; sore raveled with much triumphing.

In the middle of this hall in the hill was incarcerated the stone image
of one Demi, the tutelar deity of Willamina. All green and oozy like a
stone under water, poor Demi looked as if sore harassed with sciatics
and lumbagos.

But he was cheered from aloft, by the promise of receiving a garland
all blooming on his crown; the Dryads sporting in the woodlands above,
forever peeping down the cleft, and essaying to drop him a coronal.

Now, the still, panting glen of Willamilla, nested so close by the
mountains, and a goodly green mark for the archer in the sun, would
have been almost untenable were it not for the grotto. Hereby, it
breathed the blessed breezes of Omi; a mountain promontory buttressing
the island to the east, receiving the cool stream of the upland Trades;
much pleasanter than the currents beneath.

At all times, even in the brooding noon-day, a gush of cool air came
hand-in-hand with the cool waters, that burst with a shout into the
palace of Donjalolo. And as, after first refreshing the king, as in
loyalty bound, the stream flowed at large through the glen, and bathed
its verdure; so, the blessed breezes of Omi, not only made pleasant the
House of the Afternoon; but finding ample outlet in its wide, open
front, blew forth upon the bosom of all Willamilla.

“Come let us take the air of Omi,” was a very common saying in the
glen. And the speaker would hie with his comrade toward the grotto; and
flinging himself on the turf, pass his hand through his locks, and
recline; making a joy and a business of breathing; for truly the
breezes of Omi were as air-wine to the lungs.

Yet was not this breeze over-cool; though at times the zephyrs grew
boisterous. Especially at the season of high sea, when the strong
Trades drawn down the cleft in the mountain, rushed forth from the
grotto with wonderful force. Crossing it then, you had much ado to keep
your robe on your back.

Thus much for the House of the Afternoon. Whither—after spending the
shady morning under the eastern cliffs of the glen—daily, at a certain
hour, Donjalolo in his palanquin was borne; there, finding new shades;
and there tarrying till evening; when again he was transported whence
he came: thereby anticipating the revolution of the sun. Thus dodging
day’s luminary through life, the prince hied to and fro in his
dominions; on his smooth, spotless brow Sol’s rays never shining.




CHAPTER LXXVIII.
Babbalanja Solus


Of the House of the Afternoon something yet remains to be said.

It was chiefly distinguished by its pavement, where, according to the
strange customs of the isle, were inlaid the reputed skeletons of
Donjalolo’s sires; each surrounded by a mosaic of corals,—red, white,
and black, intermixed with vitreous stones fallen from the skies in a
meteoric shower. These delineated the tattooing of the departed. Near
by, were imbedded their arms: mace, bow, and spear, in similar
marquetry; and over each skull was the likeness of a scepter.

First and conspicuous lay the half-decayed remains of Marjora, the
father of these Coral Kings; by his side, the storied, sickle-shaped
weapon, wherewith he slew his brother Teei.

“Line of kings and row of scepters,” said Babbalanja as he gazed.
“Donjalolo, come forth and ponder on thy sires. Here they lie, from
dread Marjora down to him who fathered thee. Here are their bones,
their spears, and their javelins; their scepters, and the very fashion
of their tattooing: all that can be got together of what they were.
Tell me, oh king, what are thy thoughts? Dotest thou on these thy
sires? Art thou more truly royal, that they were kings? Or more a man,
that they were men? Is it a fable, or a verity about Marjora and the
murdered Teei? But here is the mighty conqueror,—ask him. Speak to him:
son to sire: king to king. Prick him; beg; buffet; entreat; spurn;
split the globe, he will not budge. Walk over and over thy whole
ancestral line, and they will not start. They are not here. Ay, the
dead are not to be found, even in their graves. Nor have they simply
departed; for they willed not to go; they died not by choice;
whithersoever they have gone, thither have they been dragged; and if so
be, they are extinct, their nihilities went not more against their
grain, than their forced quitting of Mardi. Either way, something has
become of them that they sought not. Truly, had stout-hearted Marjora
sworn to live here in Willamilla for ay, and kept the vow, that would
have been royalty indeed; but here he lies. Marjora! rise! Juam
revolteth! Lo, I stamp upon thy scepter; base menials tread upon thee
where thou hest! Up, king, up! What? no reply? Are not these bones
thine? Oh, how the living triumph over the dead! Marjora! answer. Art
thou? or art thou not? I see thee not; I hear thee not; I feel thee
not; eyes, ears, hands, are worthless to test thy being; and if thou
art, thou art something beyond all human thought to compass. We must
have other faculties to know thee by. Why, thou art not even a
sightless sound; not the echo of an echo; here are thy bones.
Donjalolo, methinks I see thee fallen upon by assassins:—which of thy
fathers riseth to the rescue? I see thee dying:—which of them telleth
thee what cheer beyond the grave? But they have gone to the land
unknown. Meet phrase. Where is it? Not one of Oro’s priests telleth a
straight story concerning it; ’twill be hard finding their paradises.
Touching the life of Alma, in Mohi’s chronicles, ’tis related, that a
man was once raised from the tomb. But rubbed he not his eyes, and
stared he not most vacantly? Not one revelation did he make. Ye gods!
to have been a bystander there!

“At best, ’tis but a hope. But will a longing bring the thing desired?
Doth dread avert its object? An instinct is no preservative. The fire I
shrink from, may consume me.—But dead, and yet alive; alive, yet
dead;—thus say the sages of Maramma. But die we then living? Yet if our
dead fathers somewhere and somehow live, why not our unborn sons? For
backward or forward, eternity is the same; already have we been the
nothing we dread to be. Icy thought! But bring it home,—it will not
stay. What ho, hot heart of mine: to beat thus lustily awhile, to feel
in the red rushing blood, and then be ashes,—can this be so? But peace,
peace, thou liar in me, telling me I am immortal—shall I not be as
these bones? To come to this! But the balsam-dropping palms, whose
boles run milk, whose plumes wave boastful in the air, they perish in
their prime, and bow their blasted trunks. Nothing abideth; the river
of yesterday floweth not to-day; the sun’s rising is a setting; living
is dying; the very mountains melt; and all revolve:—systems and
asteroids; the sun wheels through the zodiac, and the zodiac is a
revolution. Ah gods! in all this universal stir, am I to prove one
stable thing?

“Grim chiefs in skeletons, avaunt! Ye are but dust; belike the dust of
beggars; for on this bed, paupers may lie down with kings, and filch
their skulls. This, great Marjora’s arm? No, some old paralytic’s. Ye,
kings? ye, men? Where are your vouchers? I do reject your brother-hood,
ye libelous remains. But no, no; despise them not, oh Babbalanja! Thy
own skeleton, thou thyself dost carry with thee, through this mortal
life; and aye would view it, but for kind nature’s screen; thou art
death alive; and e’en to what’s before thee wilt thou come. Ay, thy
children’s children will walk over thee: thou, voiceless as a calm.”

And over the Coral Kings, Babbalanja paced in profound meditation.




CHAPTER LXXIX.
The Center Of Many Circumferences


Like Donjalolo himself, we hie to and fro; for back now must we pace to
the House of the Morning.

In its rear, there diverged three separate arbors, leading to less
public apartments.

Traversing the central arbor, and fancying it will soon lead you to
open ground, you suddenly come upon the most private retreat of the
prince: a square structure; plain as a pyramid; and without, as
inscrutable. Down to the very ground, its walls are thatched; but on
the farther side a passage-way opens, which you enter. But not yet are
you within. Scarce a yard distant, stands an inner thatched wall, blank
as the first. Passing along the intervening corridor, lighted by narrow
apertures, you reach the opposite side, and a second opening is
revealed. This entering, another corridor; lighted as the first, but
more dim, and a third blank wall. And thus, three times three, you worm
round and round, the twilight lessening as you proceed; until at last,
you enter the citadel itself: the innermost arbor of a nest; whereof,
each has its roof, distinct from the rest.

The heart of the place is but small; illuminated by a range of open
sky-lights, downward contracting.

Innumerable as the leaves of an endless folio, multitudinous mats cover
the floor; whereon reclining by night, like Pharaoh on the top of his
patrimonial pile, the inmate looks heavenward, and heavenward only;
gazing at the torchlight processions in the skies, when, in state, the
suns march to be crowned.

And here, in this impenetrable retreat, centrally slumbered the
universe-rounded, zodiac-belted, horizon-zoned, sea-girt, reef- sashed,
mountain-locked, arbor-nested, royalty-girdled, arm-clasped,
self-hugged, indivisible Donjalolo, absolute monarch of Juam:—the
husk-inhusked meat in a nut; the innermost spark in a ruby; the
juice-nested seed in a goldenrinded orange; the red royal stone in an
effeminate peach; the insphered sphere of spheres.




CHAPTER LXXX.
Donjalolo In The Bosom Of His Family


To pretend to relate the manner in which Juam’s ruler passed his
captive days, without making suitable mention of his harem, would be to
paint one’s full-length likeness and omit the face. For it was his
harem that did much to stamp the character of Donjalolo.

And had he possessed but a single spouse, most discourteous, surely, to
have overlooked the princess; much more, then, as it is; and by
how-much the more, a plurality exceeds a unit.

Exclusive of the female attendants, by day waiting upon the person of
the king, he had wives thirty in number, corresponding in name to the
nights of the moon. For, in Juam, time is not reckoned by days, but by
nights; each night of the lunar month having its own designation;
which, relatively only, is extended to the day.

In uniform succession, the thirty wives ruled queen of the king’s
heart. An arrangement most wise and judicious; precluding much of that
jealousy and confusion prevalent in ill-regulated seraglios. For as
thirty spouses must be either more desirable, or less desirable than
one; so is a harem thirty times more difficult to manage than an
establishment with one solitary mistress. But Donjalolo’s wives were so
nicely drilled, that for the most part, things went on very smoothly.
Nor were his brows much furrowed with wrinkles referable to domestic
cares and tribulations. Although, as in due time will be seen, from
these he was not altogether exempt.

Now, according to Braid-Beard, who, among other abstruse political
researches, had accurately informed himself concerning the internal
administration of Donjalolo’s harem, the following was the method
pursued therein.

On the Aquella, or First Night of the month, the queen of that name
assumes her diadem, and reigns. So too with Azzolino the Second, and
Velluvi the Third Night of the Moon; and so on, even unto the utter
eclipse thereof; through Calends, Nones, and Ides.

For convenience, the king is furnished with a card, whereon are copied
the various ciphers upon the arms of his queens; and parallel thereto,
the hieroglyphics significant of the corresponding Nights of the month.
Glancing over this, Donjalolo predicts the true time of the rising and
setting of all his stars.

This Moon of wives was lodged in two spacious seraglios, which few
mortals beheld. For, so deeply were they buried in a grove; so
overpowered with verdure; so overrun with vines; and so hazy with the
incense of flowers; that they were almost invisible, unless closely
approached. Certain it was, that it demanded no small enterprise,
diligence, and sagacity, to explore the mysterious wood in search of
them. Though a strange, sweet, humming sound, as of the clustering and
swarming of warm bees among roses, at last hinted the royal honey at
hand. High in air, toward the summit of the cliff, overlooking this
side of the glen, a narrow ledge of rocks might have been seen, from
which, rumor whispered, was to be caught an angular peep at the tip of
the apex of the roof of the nearest seraglio. But this wild report had
never been established. Nor, indeed, was it susceptible of a test. For
was not that rock inaccessible as the eyrie of young eagles? But to
guard against the possibility of any visual profanation, Donjalolo had
authorized an edict, forever tabooing that rock to foot of man or
pinion of fowl. Birds and bipeds both trembled and obeyed; taking a
wide circuit to avoid the spot.

Access to the seraglios was had by corresponding arbors leading from
the palace. The seraglio to the right was denominated “Ravi” (Before),
that to the left “Zono” (After). The meaning of which was, that upon
the termination of her reign the queen wended her way to the Zono;
there tarrying with her predecessors till the Ravi was emptied; when
the entire Moon of wives, swallow-like, migrated back whence they came;
and the procession was gone over again.

In due order, the queens reposed upon mats inwoven with their
respective ciphers. In the Ravi, the mat of the queen-apparent, or next
in succession, was spread by the portal. In the Zono, the newly-
widowed queen reposed furthest from it.

But alas for all method where thirty wives are concerned.
Notwithstanding these excellent arrangements, the mature result of ages
of progressive improvement in the economy of the royal seraglios in
Willamilla, it must needs be related, that at times the order of
precedence became confused, and was very hard to restore.

At intervals, some one of the wives was weeded out, to the no small
delight of the remainder; but to their equal vexation her place would
soon after be supplied by some beautiful stranger; who assuming the
denomination of the vacated Night of the Moon, thenceforth commenced
her monthly revolutions in the king’s infallible calendar.

In constant attendance, was a band of old men; woe-begone, thin of leg,
and puny of frame; whose grateful task it was, to tarry in the garden
of Donjalolo’s delights, without ever touching the roses. Along with
innumerable other duties, they were perpetually kept coming and going
upon ten thousand errands; for they had it in strict charge to obey the
slightest behests of the damsels; and with all imaginable expedition to
run, fly, swim, or dissolve into impalpable air, at the shortest
possible notice.

So laborious their avocations, that none could discharge them for more
than a twelvemonth, at the end of that period giving up the ghost out
of pure exhaustion of the locomotive apparatus. It was this constant
drain upon the stock of masculine old age in the glen, that so
bethinned its small population of gray-beards and hoary-heads. And any
old man hitherto exempted, who happened to receive a summons to repair
to the palace, and there wait the pleasure of the king: this
unfortunate, at once suspecting his doom, put his arbor in order; oiled
and suppled his joints; took a long farewell of his friends; selected
his burial-place; and going resigned to his fate, in due time expired
like the rest.

Had any one of them cast about for some alleviating circumstance, he
might possibly have derived some little consolation from the thought,
that though a slave to the whims of thirty princesses, he was
nevertheless one of their guardians, and as such, he might ingeniously
have concluded, their superior. But small consolation this. For the
damsels were as blithe as larks, more playful than kittens; never
looking sad and sentimental, projecting clandestine escapes. But
supplied with the thirtieth part of all that Aspasia could desire;
glorying in being the spouses of a king; nor in the remotest degree
anxious about eventual dowers; they were care-free, content, and
rejoicing, as the rays of the morning.

Poor old men, then; it would be hard to distill out of your fate, one
drop of the balm of consolation. For, commissioned to watch over those
who forever kept you on the trot, affording you no time to hunt up
peccadilloes; was not this circumstance an aggravation of hard times? a
sharpening and edge-giving to the steel in your souls?

But much yet remains unsaid.

To dwell no more upon the eternal wear-and-tear incident to these
attenuated old warders, they were intensely hated by the damsels.
Inasmuch, as it was archly opined, for what ulterior purposes they were
retained.

Nightly couching, on guard, round the seraglio, like fangless old
bronze dragons round a fountain enchanted, the old men ever and anon
cried out mightily, by reason of sore pinches and scratches received in
the dark: And tri-trebly-tri-triply girt about as he was, Donjalolo
himself started from his slumbers, raced round and round through his
ten thousand corridors; at last bursting all dizzy among his
twenty-nine queens, to see what under the seventh-heavens was the
matter. When, lo and behold! there lay the innocents all sound asleep;
the dragons moaning over their mysterious bruises.

Ah me! his harem, like all large families, was the delight and the
torment of the days and nights of Donjalolo.

And in one special matter was he either eminently miserable, or
otherwise: for all his multiplicity of wives, he had never an heir. Not
his, the proud paternal glance of the Grand Turk Solyman, looking round
upon a hundred sons, all bone of his bone, and squinting with his
squint.




CHAPTER LXXXI.
Wherein Babbalanja Relates The Adventure Of One Karkeke In The Land Of
Shades


At our morning repast on the second day of our stay in the hollow, our
party indulged in much lively discourse.

“Samoa,” said I, “those isles of yours, of whose beauty you so often
make vauntful mention, can those isles, good Samoa, furnish a valley in
all respects equal to Willamilla?”

Disdainful answer was made, that Willamilla might be endurable enough
for a sojourn, but as a permanent abode, any glen of his own natal isle
was unspeakably superior.

“In the great valley of Savaii,” cried Samoa, “for every leaf grown
here in Willamilla, grows a stately tree; and for every tree here
waving, in Savaii flourishes a goodly warrior.”

Immeasurable was the disgust of the Upoluan for the enervated subjects
of Donjalolo; and for Donjalolo himself; though it was shrewdly
divined, that his annoying reception at the hands of the royalty of
Juam, had something to do with his disdain.

To Jarl, no similar question was put; for he was sadly deficient in a
taste for the picturesque. But he cursorily observed, that in his
blue-water opinion, Willamilla was next to uninhabitable, all view of
the sea being intercepted.

And here it may be well to relate a comical blunder on the part of
honest Jarl; concerning which, Samoa, the savage, often afterward
twitted him; as indicating a rusticity, and want of polish in his
breeding. It rather originated, however, in his not heeding the
conventionalities of the strange people among whom he was thrown.

The anecdote is not an epic; but here it is.

Reclining in our arbor, we breakfasted upon a marble slab; so
frost-white, and flowingly traced with blue veins, that it seemed a
little lake sheeted over with ice: Diana’s virgin bosom congéaled.

Before each guest was a richly carved bowl and gourd, fruit and wine
freighted also the empty hemisphere of a small nut, the purpose of
which was a problem. Now, King Jarl scorned to admit the slightest
degree of under-breeding in the matter of polite feeding. So nothing
was a problem to him. At once reminded of the morsel of Arvaroot in his
mouth, a substitute for another sort of sedative then unattainable, he
was instantly illuminated concerning the purpose of the nut; and very
complacently introduced each to the other; in the innocence of his
ignorance making no doubt that he had acquitted himself with
discretion; the little hemisphere plainly being intended as a place of
temporary deposit for the Arva of the guests.

The company were astounded: Samoa more than all. King Jarl, meanwhile,
looking at all present with the utmost serenity. At length, one of the
horrified attendants, using two sticks for a forceps, disappeared with
the obnoxious nut, Upon which, the meal proceeded.

This attendant was not seen again for many days; which gave rise to the
supposition, that journeying to the sea-side, he had embarked for some
distant strand; there, to bury out of sight the abomination with which
he was freighted.

Upon this, his egregious misadventure, calculated to do discredit to
our party, and bring Media himself into contempt, Babbalanja had no
scruples in taking Jarl roundly to task. He assured him, that it argued
but little brains to evince a desire to be thought familiar with all
things; that however desirable as incidental attainments,
conventionalities, in themselves, were the very least of arbitrary
trifles; the knowledge of them, innate with no man. “Moreover Jarl,” he
added, “in essence, conventionalities are but mimickings, at which
monkeys succeed best. Hence, when you find yourself at a loss in these
matters, wait patiently, and mark what the other monkeys do: and then
follow suit. And by so doing, you will gain a vast reputation as an
accomplished ape. Above all things, follow not the silly example of the
young spark Karkeke, of whom Mohi was telling me. Dying, and entering
the other world with a mincing gait, and there finding certain customs
quite strange and new; such as friendly shades passing through each
other by way of a salutation;—Karkeke, nevertheless, resolved to show
no sign of embarrassment. Accosted by a phantom, with wings folded
pensively, plumes interlocked across its chest, he off head; and stood
obsequiously before it. Staring at him for an instant, the spirit cut
him dead; murmuring to itself, ‘Ah, some terrestrial bumpkin, I fancy,’
and passed on with its celestial nose in the highly rarified air. But
silly Karkeke undertaking to replace his head, found that it would no
more stay on; but forever tumbled off; even in the act of nodding a
salute; which calamity kept putting him out of countenance. And thus
through all eternity is he punished for his folly, in having pretended
to be wise, wherein he was ignorant. Head under arm, he wanders about,
the scorn and ridicule of the other world.”

Our repast concluded, messengers arrived from the prince, courteously
inviting our presence at the House of the Morning. Thither we went;
journeying in sedans, sent across the hollow, for that purpose, by
Donjalolo.




CHAPTER LXXXII.
How Donjalolo, Sent Agents To The Surrounding Isles; With The Result


Ere recounting what was beheld on entering the House of the Morning,
some previous information is needful. Though so many of Donjalolo’s
days were consumed by sloth and luxury, there came to him certain
intervals of thoughtfulness, when all his curiosity concerning the
things of outer Mardi revived with augmented intensity. In these moods,
he would send abroad deputations, inviting to Willamilla the kings of
the neighboring islands; together with the most celebrated priests,
bards, story-tellers, magicians, and wise men; that he might hear them
converse of those things, which he could not behold for himself.

But at last, he bethought him, that the various narrations he had
heard, could not have been otherwise than unavoidably faulty; by reason
that they had been principally obtained from the inhabitants of the
countries described; who, very naturally, must have been inclined to
partiality or uncandidness in their statements. Wherefore he had very
lately dispatched to the isles special agents of his own; honest of
heart, keen of eye, and shrewd of understanding; to seek out every
thing that promised to illuminate him concerning the places they
visited, and also to collect various specimens of interesting objects;
so that at last he might avail himself of the researches of others, and
see with their eyes.

But though two observers were sent to every one of the neighboring
lands; yet each was to act independently; make his own inquiries; form
his own conclusions; and return with his own specimens; wholly
regardless of the proceedings of the other.

It so came to pass, that on the very day of our arrival in the glen,
these pilgrims returned from their travels. And Donjalolo had set apart
the following morning to giving them a grand public reception. And it
was to this, that our party had been invited, as related in the chapter
preceding.

In the great Palm-hall of the House of the Morning, we were assigned
distinguished mats, to the right of the prince; his chiefs, attendants,
and subjects assembled in the open colonnades without.

When all was in readiness, in marched the company of savans and
travelers; and humbly standing in a semi-circle before the king, their
numerous hampers were deposited at their feet.

Donjalolo was now in high spirits, thinking of the rich store of
reliable information about to be furnished.

“Zuma,” said he, addressing the foremost of the company, “you and
Varnopi were directed to explore the island of Rafona. Proceed now, and
relate all you know of that place. Your narration heard, we will list
to Varnopi.”

With a profound inclination the traveler obeyed.

But soon Donjalolo interrupted him. “What say you, Zuma, about the
secret cavern, and the treasures therein? A very different account,
this, from all I have heard hitherto; but perhaps yours is the true
version. Go on.”

But very soon, poor Zuma was again interrupted by exclamations of
surprise. Nay, even to the very end of his mountings.

But when he had done, Donjalolo observed, that if from any cause Zuma
was in error or obscure, Varnopi would not fail to set him right.

So Varnopi was called upon.

But not long had Varnopi proceeded, when Donjalolo changed color.

“What!” he exclaimed, “will ye contradict each other before our very
face. Oh Oro! how hard is truth to be come at by proxy! Fifty accounts
have I had of Rafona; none of which wholly agreed; and here, these two
varlets, sent expressly to behold and report, these two lying knaves,
speak crookedly both. How is it? Are the lenses in their eyes
diverse-hued, that objects seem different to both; for undeniable is
it, that the things they thus clashingly speak of are to be known for
the same; though represented with unlike colors and qualities. But dumb
things can not lie nor err. Unpack thy hampers, Zuma. Here, bring them
close: now: what is this?”

“That,” tremblingly replied Zuma, “is a specimen of the famous reef-
bar on the west side of the island of Rafona; your highness perceives
its deep red dyes.”

Said Donjalolo, “Varnopi, hast thou a piece of this coral, also?”

“I have, your highness,” said Varnopi; “here it is.”

Taking it from his hand, Donjalolo gazed at its bleached, white hue;
then dashing it to the pavement, “Oh mighty Oro! Truth dwells in her
fountains; where every one must drink for himself. For me, vain all
hope of ever knowing Mardi! Away! Better know nothing, than be
deceived. Break up!”

And Donjalolo rose, and retired.

All present now broke out in a storm of vociferation; some siding with
Zuma; others with Varnopi; each of whom, in turn, was declared the man
to be relied upon.

Marking all this, Babbalanja, who had been silently looking on, leaning
against one of the palm pillars, quietly observed to Media:— “My lord,
I have seen this same reef at Rafona. In various places, it is of
various hues. As for Zuma and Varnopi, both are wrong, and both are
right.”




CHAPTER LXXXIII.
They Visit The Tributary Islets


In Willamilla, no Yillah being found, on the third day we took leave of
Donjalolo; who lavished upon us many caresses and, somewhat reluctantly
on Media’s part, we quitted the vale.

One by one, we now visited the outer villages of Juam; and crossing the
waters, wandered several days among its tributary isles. There we saw
the viceroys of him who reigned in the hollow: chieftains of whom
Donjalolo was proud; so honest, humble, and faithful; so bent upon
ameliorating the condition of those under their rule. For, be it said,
Donjalolo was a charitable prince; in his serious intervals, ever
seeking the welfare of his subjects, though after an imperial view of
his own. But alas, in that sunny donjon among the mountains, where he
dwelt, how could Donjalolo be sure, that the things he decreed were
executed in regions forever remote from his view. Ah! very bland, very
innocent, very pious, the faces his viceroys presented during their
monthly visits to Willamilla. But as cruel their visage, when, returned
to their islets, they abandoned themselves to all the license of
tyrants; like Verres reveling down the rights of the Sicilians.

Like Carmelites, they came to Donjalolo, barefooted; but in their
homes, their proud latchets were tied by their slaves. Before their
king-belted prince, they stood rope-girdled like self-abased monks of
St. Francis; but with those ropes, before their palaces, they hung
Innocence and Truth.

As still seeking Yillah, and still disappointed, we roved through the
lands which these chieftains ruled, Babbalanja exclaimed—“Let us
depart; idle our search, in isles that have viceroys for kings.”

At early dawn, about embarking for a distant land, there came to us
certain messengers of Donjalolo, saying that their lord the king,
repenting of so soon parting company with Media and Taji, besought them
to return with all haste; for that very morning, in Willamilla, a regal
banquet was preparing; to which many neighboring kings had been
invited, most of whom had already arrived.

Declaring that there was no alternative but compliance, Media acceded;
and with the king’s messengers we returned to the glen.




CHAPTER LXXXIV.
Taji Sits Down To Dinner With Five-And-Twenty Kings, And A Royal Time
They Have


It was afternoon when we emerged from the defile. And informed that our
host was receiving his guests in the House of the Afternoon, thither we
directed our steps.

Soft in our face, blew the blessed breezes of Omi, stirring the leaves
overhead; while, here and there, through the trees, showed the
idol-bearers of the royal retreat, hand in hand, linked with festoons
of flowers. Still beyond, on a level, sparkled the nodding crowns of
the kings, like the constellation Corona-Borealis, the horizon just
gained.

Close by his noon-tide friend, the cascade at the mouth of the grotto,
reposed on his crimson mat, Donjalolo:—arrayed in a vestment of the
finest white tappa of Mardi, figured all over with bright yellow
lizards, so curiously stained in the gauze, that he seemed overrun, as
with golden mice.

Marjora’s girdle girdled his loins, tasseled with the congregated teeth
of his sires. A jeweled turban-tiara, milk-white, surmounted his brow,
over which waved a copse of Pintado plumes.

But what sways in his hand? A scepter, similar to those likenesses of
scepters, imbedded among the corals at his feet. A polished thigh-
bone; by Braid-Beard declared once Teei’s the Murdered. For to
emphasize his intention utterly to rule, Marjora himself had selected
this emblem of dominion over mankind.

But even this last despite done to dead Teei had once been transcended.
In the usurper’s time, prevailed the belief, that the saliva of kings
must never touch ground; and Mohi’s Chronicles made mention, that
during the life time of Marjora, Teei’s skull had been devoted to the
basest of purposes: Marjora’s, the hate no turf could bury.

Yet, traditions like these ever seem dubious. There be many who deny
the hump, moral and physical, of Gloster Richard.

Still advancing unperceived, in social hilarity we descried their
Highnesses, chatting together like the most plebeian of mortals; full
as merry as the monks of old. But marking our approach, all changed. A
pair of potentates, who had been playfully trifling, hurriedly adjusted
their diadems, threw themselves into attitudes, looking stately as
statues. Phidias turned not out his Jupiter so soon.

In various-dyed robes the five-and-twenty kings were arrayed; and
various their features, as the rows of lips, eyes and ears in John
Caspar Lavater’s physiognomical charts. Nevertheless, to a king, all
their noses were aquiline.

There were long fox-tail beards of silver gray, and enameled chins,
like those of girls; bald pates and Merovingian locks; smooth brows and
wrinkles: forms erect and stooping; an eye that squinted; one king was
deaf; by his side, another that was halt; and not far off, a dotard.
They were old and young, tall and short, handsome and ugly, fat and
lean, cunning and simple.

With animated courtesy our host received us; assigning a neighboring
bower for Babbalanja and the rest; and among so many right-royal,
demi-divine guests, how could the demi-gods Media and Taji be otherwise
than at home?

The unwonted sprightliness of Donjalolo surprised us. But he was in one
of those relapses of desperate gayety in-variably following his
failures in efforts to amend his life. And the bootless issue of his
late mission to outer Mardi had thrown him into a mood for revelry. Nor
had he lately shunned a wild wine, called Morando.

A slave now appearing with a bowl of this beverage, it circulated
freely.

Not to gainsay the truth, we fancied the Morando much. A nutty, pungent
flavor it had; like some kinds of arrack distilled in the Philippine
isles. And a marvelous effect did it have, in dissolving the
crystalization of the brain; leaving nothing but precious little drops
of good humor, beading round the bowl of the cranium.

Meanwhile, garlanded boys, climbing the limbs of the idol-pillars, and
stirruping their feet in their most holy mouths, suspended hangings of
crimson tappa all round the hall; so that sweeping the pavement they
rustled in the breeze from the grot.

Presently, stalwart slaves advanced; bearing a mighty basin of a
porphyry hue, deep-hollowed out of a tree. Outside, were innumerable
grotesque conceits; conspicuous among which, for a border, was an
endless string of the royal lizards circumnavigating the basin in
inverted chase of their tails.

Peculiar to the groves of Willamilla, the yellow lizard formed part of
the arms of Juam. And when Donjalolo’s messenger went abroad, they
carried its effigy, as the emblem of their royal master; themselves
being known, as the Gentlemen of the Golden Lizard.

The porphyry-hued basin planted full in our midst, the attendants
forthwith filled the same with the living waters from the cascade; a
proceeding, for which some of the company were at a loss to account,
unless his highness, our host, with all the coolness of royalty,
purposed cooling himself still further, by taking a bath in presence of
his guests. A conjecture, most premature; for directly, the basin being
filled to within a few inches of the lizards, the attendants fell to
launching therein divers goodly sized trenchers, all laden with choice
viands:—wild boar meat; humps of grampuses; embrowned bread-fruit,
roasted in odoriferous fires of sandal wood, but suffered to cool; gold
fish, dressed with the fragrant juices of berries; citron sauce; rolls
of the baked paste of yams; juicy bananas, steeped in a saccharine oil;
marmalade of plantains; jellies of guava; confections of the treacle of
palm sap; and many other dainties; besides numerous stained calabashes
of Morando, and other beverages, fixed in carved floats to make them
buoyant.

The guests assigned seats, by the woven handles attached to his purple
mat, the prince, our host, was now gently moved by his servitors to the
head of the porphyry-hued basin. Where, flanked by lofty crowned-heads,
white-tiaraed, and radiant with royalty, he sat; like snow-turbaned
Mont Blanc, at sunrise presiding over the head waters of the Rhone; to
right and left, looming the gilded summits of the Simplon, the Gothard,
the Jungfrau, the Great St. Bernard, and the Grand Glockner.

Yet turbid from the launching of its freight, Lake Como tossed to and
fro its navies of good cheer, the shadows of the king-peaks wildly
flitting thereupon.

But no frigid wine and fruit cooler, Lake Como; as at first it did
seem; but a tropical dining table, its surface a slab of light blue St.
Pons marble in a state of fluidity.

Now, many a crown was doffed; scepters laid aside; girdles slackened;
and among those verdant viands the bearded kings like goats did browse;
or tusking their wild boar’s meat, like mastiffs ate.

And like unto some well-fought fight, beginning calmly, but pressing
forward to a fiery rush, this well-fought feast did now wax warm.

A few royal epicures, however, there were: epicures intent upon
concoctions, admixtures, and masterly compoundings; who comported
themselves with all due deliberation and dignity; hurrying themselves
into no reckless deglutition of the dainties. Ah! admirable conceit,
Lake Como: superseding attendants. For, from hand to hand the trenchers
sailed; no sooner gaining one port, than dispatched over sea to
another.

Well suited they were for the occasion; sailing high out of water, to
resist the convivial swell at times ruffling the sociable sea; and
sharp at both ends, still better adapting them to easy navigation.

But soon, the Morando, in triumphant decanters, went round, reeling
like barks before a breeze. But their voyages were brief; and ere long,
in certain havens, the accumulation of empty vessels threatened to
bridge the lake with pontoons. In those directions, Trade winds were
setting. But full soon, cut out were all unladen and unprofitable
gourds; and replaced by jolly-bellied calabashes, for a time sailing
deep, yawing heavily to the push.

At last, the whole flotilla of trenchers—wrecks and all—were sent
swimming to the further end of Lake Como; and thence removed, gave
place to ruddy hillocks of fruit, and floating islands of flowers.
Chief among the former, a quince-like, golden sphere, that filled the
air with such fragrance, you thought you were tasting its flavor.

Nor did the wine cease flowing. That day the Juam grape did bleed; that
day the tendril ringlets of the vines, did all uncurl and grape by
grape, in sheer dismay, the sun ripe clusters dropped. Grape-glad were
five-and-twenty kings: five-and-twenty kings were merry.

Morando’s vintage had no end; nor other liquids, in the royal cellar
stored, somewhere secret in the grot. Oh! where’s the endless Niger’s
source? Search ye here, or search ye there; on, on, through ravine,
vega, vale—no head waters will ye find. But why need gain the hidden
spring, when its lavish stream flows by? At three-fold mouths that
Delta-grot discharged; rivers golden, white, and red.

But who may sing for aye? Down I come, and light upon the old and prosy
plain.

Among other decanters set afloat, was a pompous, lordly-looking
demijohn, but old and reverend withal, that sailed about, consequential
as an autocrat going to be crowned, or a treasure- freighted argosie
bound home before the wind. It looked solemn, however, though it
reeled; peradventure, far gone with its own potent contents.

Oh! russet shores of Rhine and Rhone! oh, mellow memories of ripe old
vintages! oh, cobwebs in the Pyramids! oh, dust on Pharaoh’s tomb!—all,
all recur, as I bethink me of that glorious gourd, its contents cogent
as Tokay, itself as old as Mohi’s legends; more venerable to look at
than his beard. Whence came it? Buried in vases, so saith the label,
with the heart of old Marjora, now dead one hundred thousand moons.
Exhumed at last, it looked no wine, but was shrunk into a subtile
syrup.

This special calabash was distinguished by numerous trappings,
caparisoned like the sacred bay steed led before the Great Khan of
Tartary. A most curious and betasseled network encased it; and the
royal lizard was jealously twisted about its neck, like a hand on a
throat containing some invaluable secret.

All Hail, Marzilla! King’s Own Royal Particular! A vinous Percy! Dating
back to the Conquest! Distilled of yore from purple berries growing in
the purple valley of Ardair! Thrice hail.

But the imperial Marzilla was not for all; gods only could partake; the
Kings and demigods of the isles; excluding left-handed descendants of
sad rakes of immortals, in old times breaking heads and hearts in
Mardi, bequeathing bars-sinister to many mortals, who now in vain might
urge a claim to a cup-full of right regal Marzilla.

The Royal Particular was pressed upon me, by the now jovial Donjalolo.
With his own sceptered hand charging my flagon to the brim, he declared
his despotic pleasure, that I should quaff it off to the last lingering
globule. No hard calamity, truly; for the drinking of this wine was as
the singing of a mighty ode, or frenzied lyric to the soul.

“Drink, Taji,” cried Donjalolo, “drink deep. In this wine a king’s
heart is dissolved. Drink long; in this wine lurk the seeds of the life
everlasting. Drink deep; drink long: thou drinkest wisdom and valor at
every draught. Drink forever, oh Taji, for thou drinkest that which
will enable thee to stand up and speak out before mighty Oro himself.”

“Borabolla,” he added, turning round upon a domed old king at his left,
“Was it not the god Xipho, who begged of my great-great- grandsire a
draught of this same wine, saying he was about to beget a hero?”

“Even so. And thy glorious Marzilla produced thrice valiant Ononna, who
slew the giants of the reef.”

“Ha, ha, hear’st that, oh Taji?” And Donjalolo drained another cup.

Amazing! the flexibility of the royal elbow, and the rigidity of the
royal spine! More especially as we had been impressed with a notion of
their debility. But, sometimes these seemingly enervated young blades
approve themselves steadier of limb, than veteran revelers of very long
standing.

“Discharge the basin, and refill it with wine,” cried Donjalolo. “Break
all empty gourds! Drink, kings, and dash your cups at every draught.”

So saying, he started from his purple mat; and with one foot planted
unknowingly upon the skull of Marjora; while all the skeletons grinned
at him from the pavement; Donjalolo, holding on high his blood-red
goblet, burst forth with the following invocation:—

Ha, ha, gods and kings; fill high, one and all;
Drink, drink! shout and drink! mad respond to the call!
Fill fast, and fill frill; ’gainst the goblet ne’er sin;
Quaff there, at high tide, to the uttermost rim:—
    Flood-tide, and soul-tide to the brim!

Who with wine in him fears? who thinks of his cares?
Who sighs to be wise, when wine in him flares?
Water sinks down below, in currents full slow;
But wine mounts on high with its genial glow:—
    Welling up, till the brain overflow!

As the spheres, with a roll, some fiery of soul,
Others golden, with music, revolve round the pole;

So let our cups, radiant with many hued wines,
Round and round in groups circle, our Zodiac’s Signs:—
    Round reeling, and ringing their chimes!

Then drink, gods and kings; wine merriment brings;
It bounds through the veins; there, jubilant sings.
Let it ebb, then, and flow; wine never grows dim;
Drain down that bright tide at the foam beaded rim:—
    Fill up, every cup, to the brim!


Caught by all present, the chorus resounded again and again. The beaded
wine danced on many a beard; the cataract lifted higher its voice; the
grotto sent back a shout; the ghosts of the Coral Monarchs seemed
starting from their insulted bones. But ha, ha, ha, roared forth the
five-and-twenty kings—alive, not dead—holding both hands to their
girdles, and baying out their laughter from abysses; like Nimrod’s
hounds over some fallen elk.

Mad and crazy revelers, how ye drank and roared! but kings no more:
vestures loosed; and scepters rolling on the ground.

Glorious agrarian, thou wine! bringing all hearts on a level, and at
last all legs to the earth; even those of kings, who, to do them
justice, have been much maligned for imputed qualities not theirs. For
whoso has touched flagons with monarchs, bear they their back bones
never so stiffly on the throne, well know the rascals, to be at bottom
royal good fellows; capable of a vinous frankness exceeding that of
base-born men. Was not Alexander a boon companion? And daft Cambyses?
and what of old Rowley, as good a judge of wine and other matters, as
ever sipped claret or kisses.

If ever Taji joins a club, be it a Beef-Steak Club of Kings!

Donjalolo emptied yet another cup.

The mirth now blew a gale; like a ship’s shrouds in a Typhoon, every
tendon vibrated; the breezes of Omi came forth with a rush; the
hangings shook; the goblets danced fandangos; and Donjalolo, clapping
his hands, called before him his dancing women.

Forth came from the grotto a reed-like burst of song, making all start,
and look that way to behold such enchanting strains. Sounds heralding
sights! Swimming in the air, emerged the nymphs, lustrous arms
interlocked like Indian jugglers’ glittering snakes. Round the cascade
they thronged; then paused in its spray. Of a sudden, seemed to spring
from its midst, a young form of foam, that danced into the soul like a
thought. At last, sideways floating off, it subsided into the grotto, a
wave. Evening drawing on apace, the crimson draperies were lifted, and
festooned to the arms of the idol-pillars, admitting the rosy light of
the even.

Yielding to the re-action of the banquet, the kings now reclined; and
two mute damsels entered: one with a gourd of scented waters; the other
with napkins. Bending over Donjalolo’s steaming head, the first let
fall a shower of aromatic drops, slowly aborbed by her companion. Thus,
in turn, all were served; nothing heard but deep breathing.

In a marble vase they now kindled some incense: a handful of spices.

Shortly after, came three of the king’s beautiful smokers; who,
lighting their tubes at this odorous fire, blew over the company the
sedative fumes of the Aina.

Steeped in languor, I strove against it long; essayed to struggle out
of the enchanted mist. But a syren hand seemed ever upon me, pressing
me back.

Half-revealed, as in a dream, and the last sight that I saw, was
Donjalolo:—eyes closed, face pale, locks moist, borne slowly to his
sedan, to cross the hollow, and wake in the seclusion of his harem.




CHAPTER LXXXV.
After Dinner


As in dreams I behold thee again, Willamila! as in dreams, once again I
stroll through thy cool shady groves, oh fairest of the vallies of
Mardi! the thought of that mad merry feasting steals over my soul till
I faint.

Prostrate here and there over the bones of Donjalolo’s sires, the royal
bacchanals lay slumbering till noon.

“Which are the deadest?” said Babbalanja, peeping in, “the live kings,
or the dead ones?”

But the former were drooping flowers sought to be revived by watering.
At intervals the sedulous attendants went to and fro, besprinkling
their heads with the scented contents of their vases.

At length, one by one, the five-and-twenty kings lifted their ambrosial
curls; and shaking the dew therefrom, like eagles opened their right
royal eyes, and dilated their aquiline nostrils, full upon the golden
rays of the sun.

But why absented himself, Donjalolo? Had he cavalierly left them to
survive the banquet by themselves? But this apparent incivility was
soon explained by heralds, announcing to their prone majesties, that
through the over solicitude of his slaves, their lord the king had been
borne to his harem, without being a party to the act. But to make
amends, in his sedan, Donjalolo was even now drawing nigh. Not,
however, again to make merry; but socially to sleep in company with his
guests; for, together they had all got high, and together they must all
lie low.

So at it they went: each king to his bones, and slumbered like heroes
till evening; when, availing themselves of the cool moonlight
approaching, the royal guests bade adieu to their host; and summoning
their followers, quitted the glen.

Early next day, having determined to depart for our canoes, we
proceeded to the House of the Morning, to take leave of Donjalolo.

An amazing change, one night of solitude had wrought! Pale and languid,
we found him reclining: one hand on his throbbing temples.

Near an overturned vessel of wine, the royal girdle lay tossed at his
feet. He had waved off his frightened attendants, who crouched out of
sight.

We advanced.

“Do ye too leave me? Ready enough are ye to partake of my banquetings,
which, to such as ye, are but mad incidents in one round of more
tranquil diversions. But heed me not, Media;—I am mad. Oh, ye gods! am
I forever a captive?—Ay, free king of Odo, when you list, condescend to
visit the poor slave in Willamilla. I account them but charity, your
visits; would fain allure ye by sumptuous fare. Go, leave me; go, and
be rovers again throughout blooming Mardi. For, me, I am here for
aye.—Bring me wine, slaves! quick! that I may pledge my guests fitly.
Alas, Media, at the bottom of this cup are no sparkles as at top. Oh,
treacherous, treacherous friend! full of smiles and daggers. Yet for
such as me, oh wine, thou art e’en a prop, though it pierce the side;
for man must lean. Thou wine art the friend of the friendless, though a
foe to all. King Media, let us drink. More cups!—And now, farewell.”

Falling back, he averted his face; and silently we quitted the palace.




CHAPTER LXXXVI.
Of Those Scamps The Plujii


The beach gained, we embarked.

In good time our party recovered from the seriousness into which we had
been thrown; and a rather long passage being now before us, we whiled
away the hours as best we might.

Among many entertaining, narrations, old Braid-Beard, crossing his
calves, and peaking his beard, regaled us with some account of certain
invisible spirits, ycleped the Plujii, arrant little knaves as ever
gulped moonshine.

They were spoken of as inhabiting the island of Quelquo, in a remote
corner of the lagoon; the innocent people of which island were sadly
fretted and put out by their diabolical proceedings. Not to be wondered
at; since, dwelling as they did in the air, and completely
inaccessible, these spirits were peculiarly provocative of ire.

Detestable Plujii! With malice aforethought, they brought about high
winds that destroyed the banana plantations, and tumbled over the heads
of its occupants many a bamboo dwelling. They cracked the calabashes;
soured the “poee;” induced the colic; begat the spleen; and almost rent
people in twain with stitches in the side. In short, from whatever
evil, the cause of which the Islanders could not directly impute to
their gods, or in their own opinion was not referable to themselves,—of
that very thing must the invisible Plujii be guilty. With horrible
dreams, and blood-thirsty gnats, they invaded the most innocent
slumbers.

All things they bedeviled. A man with a wry neck ascribed it to the
Plujii; he with a bad memory railed against the Plujii; and the boy,
bruising his finger, also cursed those abominable spirits.

Nor, to some minds, at least, was there wanting strong presumptive
evidence, that at times, with invisible fingers, the above mentioned
Plujii did leave direct and tangible traces of their presence; pinching
and pounding the unfortunate Islanders; pulling their hair; plucking
their ears, and tweaking their beards and their noses. And thus
perpetually vexing, incensing, tormenting, and exasperating their
helpless victims, the atrocious Plujii reveled in their malicious
dominion over the souls and bodies of the people of Quelquo.

What it was, that induced them to enact such a part, Oro only knew; and
never but once, it seems, did old Mohi endeavor to find out.

Once upon a time, visiting Quelquo, he chanced to encounter an old
woman almost doubled together, both hands upon her abdomen; in that
manner running about distracted.

“My good woman,” said he, “what under the firmament is the matter?”

“The Plujii! the Plujii!” affectionately caressing the field of their
operations.

“But why do they torment you?” he soothingly inquired. “How should I
know? and what good would it do me if I did?”

And on she ran.

At this part of his narration, Mohi was interrupted by Media; who, much
to the surprise of all present, observed, that, unbeknown to him
(Braid-Beard), he happened to have been on that very island, at that
very time, and saw that identical old lady in the very midst of those
abdominal tribulations.

“That she was really in great distress,” he went on to say, “was
plainly to be seen; but that in that particular instance, your Plujii
had any hand in tormenting her, I had some boisterous doubts. For,
hearing that an hour or two previous she had been partaking of some
twenty unripe bananas, I rather fancied that that circumstance might
have had something to do with her sufferings. But however it was, all
the herb-leeches on the island would not have altered her own opinions
on the subject.”

“No,” said Braid-Beard; “a post-mortem examination would not have
satisfied her ghost.”

“Curious to relate,” he continued, “the people of that island never
abuse the Plujii, notwithstanding all they suffer at their hands,
unless under direct provocation; and a settled matter of faith is it,
that at such times all bitter words and hasty objurgations are entirely
overlooked, nay, pardoned on the spot, by the unseen genii against whom
they are directed.”

“Magnanimous Plujii!” cried Media. “But, Babbalanja, do you, who run a
tilt at all things, suffer this silly conceit to be uttered with
impunity in your presence? Why so silent?”

“I have been thinking, my lord,” said Babbalanja, “that though the
people of that island may at times err, in imputing their calamities to
the Plujii, that, nevertheless, upon the whole, they indulge in a
reasonable belief. For, Plujii or no Plujii, it is undeniable, that in
ten thousand ways, as if by a malicious agency, we mortals are woefully
put out and tormented; and that, too, by things in themselves so
exceedingly trivial, that it would seem almost impiety to ascribe them
to the august gods. No; there must exist some greatly inferior spirits;
so insignificant, comparatively, as to be overlooked by the supernal
powers; and through them it must be, that we are thus grievously
annoyed. At any rate; such a theory would supply a hiatus in my system
of meta-physics.”

“Well, peace to the Plujii,” said Media; “they trouble not me.”




CHAPTER LXXXVII.
Nora-Bamma


Still onward gliding, the lagoon a calm.

Hours pass; and full before us, round and green, a Moslem turban by us
floats—Nora-Bamma, Isle of Nods.

Noon-tide rolls its flood. Vibrates the air, and trembles. And by
illusion optical, thin-draped in azure haze, drift here and there the
brilliant lands: swans, peacock-plumaged, sailing through the sky. Down
to earth hath heaven come; hard telling sun-clouds from the isles.

And high in air nods Nora-Bamma. Nid-nods its tufted summit like three
ostrich plumes; its beetling crags, bent poppies, shadows, willowy
shores, all nod; its streams are murmuring down the hills; its wavelets
hush the shore.

Who dwells in Nora-Bamma? Dreamers, hypochondriacs, somnambulists; who,
from the cark and care of outer Mardi fleeing, in the poppy’s jaded
odors, seek oblivion for the past, and ecstasies to come.

Open-eyed, they sleep and dream; on their roof-trees, grapes unheeded
drop. In Nora-Bamma, whispers are as shouts; and at a zephyr’s breath,
from the woodlands shake the leaves, as of humming-birds, a flight.

All this spake Braid-Beard, of the isle. How that none ere touched its
strand, without rendering instant tribute of a nap; how that those who
thither voyaged, in golden quest of golden gourds, fast dropped asleep,
ere one was plucked; waking not till night; how that you must needs rub
hard your eyes, would you wander through the isle; and how that silent
specters would be met, haunting twilight groves, and dreamy meads;
hither gliding, thither fading, end or purpose none.

True or false, so much for Mohi’s Nora Bamma.

But as we floated on, it looked the place described. We yawned, and
yawned, as crews of vessels may; as in warm Indian seas, their
winnowing sails all swoon, when by them glides some opium argosie.




CHAPTER LXXXVIII.
In A Calm, Hautia’s Heralds Approach


“How still!” cried Babbalanja. “This calm is like unto Oro’s
everlasting serenity, and like unto man’s last despair.”

But now the silence was broken by a strange, distant, intermitted
melody in the water.

Gazing over the side, we saw naught but a far-darting ray in its
depths.

Then Yoomy, before buried in a reverie, burst forth with a verse,
sudden as a jet from a Geyser.

Like the fish of the bright and twittering fin,
    Bright fish! diving deep as high soars the lark,
So, far, far, far, doth the maiden swim,
    Wild song, wild light, in still ocean’s dark.


“What maiden, minstrel?” cried Media.

“None of these,” answered Yoomy, pointing out a shallop gliding near.

“The damsels three:—Taji, they pursue you yet.” That still canoe drew
nigh, the Iris in its prow.

Gliding slowly by, one damsel flung a Venus-car, the leaves yet fresh.

Said Yoomy—“Fly to love.”

The second maiden flung a pallid blossom, buried in hemlock leaves.

Said Yoomy, starting—“I have wrought a death.”

Then came showering Venus-cars, and glorious moss-roses numberless, and
odorous handfuls of Verbena.

Said Yoomy—“Yet fly, oh fly to me: all rosy joys and sweets are mine.”

Then the damsels floated on.

“Was ever queen more enigmatical?” cried Media—“Love,—death,—joy,—fly
to me? But what says Taji?”

“That I turn not back for Hautia; whoe’er she be, that wild witch I
contemn.”

“Then spread our pinions wide! a breeze! up sails! ply paddles all!
Come, Flora’s flute, float forth a song.”

To pieces picking the thorny roses culled from Hautia’s gifts, and
holding up their blighted cores, thus plumed and turbaned Yoomy sang,
leaning against the mast:—

Oh! royal is the rose,
    But barbed with many a dart;
Beware, beware the rose,
    ’Tis cankered at the heart.

    Sweet, sweet the sunny down,
Oh! lily, lily, lily down!
    Sweet, sweet, Verbena’s bloom!
Oh! pleasant, gentle, musky bloom!

Dread, dread the sunny down;
    Lo! lily-hooded asp;
Blooms, blooms no more Verbena;
    White-withered in your clasp.




CHAPTER LXXXIX.
Braid-Beard Rehearses The Origin Of The Isle Of Rogues


Judge not things by their names. This, the maxim illustrated respecting
the isle toward which we were sailing.

Ohonoo was its designation, in other words the Land of Rogues. So what
but a nest of villains and pirates could one fancy it to be: a
downright Tortuga, swarming with “Brethren of the coast,”—such as
Montbars, L’Ollonais, Bartolomeo, Peter of Dieppe, and desperadoes of
that kidney. But not so. The men of Ohonoo were as honest as any in
Mardi. They had a suspicious appellative for their island, true; but
not thus seemed it to them. For, upon nothing did they so much plume
themselves as upon this very name. Why? Its origin went back to old
times; and being venerable they gloried therein; though they disclaimed
its present applicability to any of their race; showing, that words are
but algebraic signs, conveying no meaning except what you please. And
to be called one thing, is oftentimes to be another.

But how came the Ohonoose by their name?

Listen, and Braid-Beard, our Herodotus, will tell.

Long and long ago, there were banished to Ohonoo all the bucaniers,
flibustiers, thieves, and malefactors of the neighboring islands; who,
becoming at last quite a numerous community, resolved to make a stand
for their dignity, and number one among the nations of Mardi. And even
as before they had been weeded out of the surrounding countries; so
now, they went to weeding out themselves; banishing all objectionable
persons to still another island.

These events happened at a period so remote, that at present it was
uncertain whether those twice banished, were thrust into their second
exile by reason of their superlative knavery, or because of their
comparative honesty. If the latter, then must the residue have been a
precious enough set of scoundrels.

However it was, the commonwealth of knaves now mustered together their
gray-beards, and wise-pates, and knowing-ones, of which last there was
a plenty, chose a king to rule over them, and went to political
housekeeping for themselves.

And in the fullness of time, this people became numerous and mighty.
And the more numerous and mighty they waxed, by so much the more did
they take pride and glory in their origin, frequently reverting to it
with manifold boastings. The proud device of their monarch was a hand
with the forefinger crooked, emblematic of the peculatory propensities
of his ancestors.

And all this, at greater length, said Mohi.

“It would seem, then, my lord,” said Babbalanja, reclining, “as if
these men of Ohonoo had canonized the derelictions of their
progenitors, though the same traits are deemed scandalous among
themselves. But it is time that makes the difference. The knave of a
thousand years ago seems a fine old fellow full of spirit and fun,
little malice in his soul; whereas, the knave of to-day seems a sour-
visaged wight, with nothing to redeem him. Many great scoundrels of our
Chronicler’s chronicles are heroes to us:—witness, Marjora the usurper.
Ay, time truly works wonders. It sublimates wine; it sublimates fame;
nay, is the creator thereof; it enriches and darkens our spears of the
Palm; enriches and enlightens the mind; it ripens cherries and young
lips; festoons old ruins, and ivies old heads; imparts a relish to old
yams, and a pungency to the Ponderings of old Bardianna; of fables
distills truths; and finally, smooths, levels, glosses, softens, melts,
and meliorates all things. Why, my lord, round Mardi itself is all the
better for its antiquity, and the more to be revered; to the
cozy-minded, more comfortable to dwell in. Ah! if ever it lay in embryo
like a green seed in the pod, what a damp, shapeless thing it must have
been, and how unpleasant from the traces of its recent creation. The
first man, quoth old Bardianna, must have felt like one going into a
new habitation, where the bamboos are green. Is there not a legend in
Maramma, that his family were long troubled with influenzas and
catarrhs?”

“Oh Time, Time, Time!” cried Yoomy—“it is Time, old midsummer Time,
that has made the old world what it is. Time hoared the old mountains,
and balded their old summits, and spread the old prairies, and built
the old forests, and molded the old vales. It is Time that has worn
glorious old channels for the glorious old rivers, and rounded the old
lakes, and deepened the old sea! It is Time—”

“Ay, full time to cease,” cried Media. “What have you to do with
cogitations not in verse, minstrel? Leave prose to Babbalanja, who is
prosy enough.”

“Even so,” said Babbalanja, “Yoomy, you have overstepped your province.
My lord Media well knows, that your business is to make the metal in
you jingle in tags, not ring in the ingot.”




CHAPTER XC.
Rare Sport At Ohonoo


Approached from the northward, Ohonoo, midway cloven down to the sea,
one half a level plain; the other, three mountain terraces—Ohonoo looks
like the first steps of a gigantic way to the sun. And such, if
Braid-Beard spoke truth, it had formerly been.

“Ere Mardi was made,” said that true old chronicler, “Vivo, one of the
genii, built a ladder of mountains whereby to go up and go down. And of
this ladder, the island of Ohonoo was the base. But wandering here and
there, incognito in a vapor, so much wickedness did Vivo spy out, that
in high dudgeon he hurried up his ladder, knocking the mountains from
under him as he went. These here and there fell into the lagoon,
forming many isles, now green and luxuriant; which, with those
sprouting from seeds dropped by a bird from the moon, comprise all the
groups in the reef.”

Surely, oh, surely, if I live till Mardi be forgotten by Mardi, I shall
not forget the sight that greeted us, as we drew nigh the shores of
this same island of Ohonoo; for was not all Ohonoo bathing in the surf
of the sea?

But let the picture be painted.

Where eastward the ocean rolls surging against the outer reef of Mardi,
there, facing a flood-gate in the barrier, stands cloven Ohonoo; her
plains sloping outward to the sea, her mountains a bulwark behind. As
at Juam, where the wild billows from seaward roll in upon its cliffs;
much more at Ohonoo, in billowy battalions charge they hotly into the
lagoon, and fall on the isle like an army from the deep. But charge
they never so boldly, and charge they forever, old Ohonoo gallantly
throws them back till all before her is one scud and rack. So charged
the bright billows of cuirassiers at Waterloo: so hurled them off the
long line of living walls, whose base was as the sea-beach,
wreck-strown, in a gale.

Without the break in the reef wide banks of coral shelve off, creating
the bar, where the waves muster for the onset, thundering in
water-bolts, that shake the whole reef, till its very spray trembles.
And then is it, that the swimmers of Ohonoo most delight to gambol in
the surf.

For this sport, a surf-board is indispensable: some five feet in
length; the width of a man’s body; convex on both sides; highly
polished; and rounded at the ends. It is held in high estimation;
invariably oiled after use; and hung up conspicuously in the dwelling
of the owner.

Ranged on the beach, the bathers, by hundreds dash in; and diving under
the swells, make straight for the outer sea, pausing not till the
comparatively smooth expanse beyond has been gained. Here, throwing
themselves upon their boards, tranquilly they wait for a billow that
suits. Snatching them up, it hurries them landward, volume and speed
both increasing, till it races along a watery wall, like the smooth,
awful verge of Niagara. Hanging over this scroll, looking down from it
as from a precipice, the bathers halloo; every limb in motion to
preserve their place on the very crest of the wave. Should they fall
behind, the squadrons that follow would whelm them; dismounted, and
thrown forward, as certainly would they be run over by the steed they
ride. ’Tis like charging at the head of cavalry: you must on.

An expert swimmer shifts his position on his plank; now half striding
it; and anon, like a rider in the ring, poising himself upright in the
scud, coming on like a man in the air.

At last all is lost in scud and vapor, as the overgrown billow bursts
like a bomb. Adroitly emerging, the swimmers thread their way out; and
like seals at the Orkneys, stand dripping upon the shore.

Landing in smooth water, some distance from the scene, we strolled
forward; and meeting a group resting, inquired for Uhia, their king. He
was pointed out in the foam. But presently drawing nigh, he embraced
Media, bidding all welcome.

The bathing over, and evening at hand, Uhia and his subjects repaired
to their canoes; and we to ours.

Landing at another quarter of the island, we journeyed up a valley
called Monlova, and were soon housed in a very pleasant retreat of our
host.

Soon supper was spread. But though the viands were rare, and the red
wine went round and round like a foaming bay horse in the ring; yet we
marked, that despite the stimulus of his day’s good sport, and the
stimulus of his brave good cheer, Uhia our host was moody and still.

Said Babbalanja “My lord, he fills wine cups for others to quaff.”

But whispered King Media, “Though Uhia be sad, be we merry, merry men.”

And merry some were, and merrily went to their mats.




CHAPTER XCI.
Of King Uhia And His Subjects


As beseemed him, Uhia was royally lodged. Ample his roof. Beneath it a
hundred attendants nightly laying their heads. But long since, he had
disbanded his damsels.

Springing from syren embrace—“They shall sap and mine me no more” he
cried “my destiny commands me. I will don my manhood. By Keevi! no more
will I clasp a waist.”

“From that time forth,” said Braid-Beard, “young Uhia spread like the
tufted top of the Palm; his thigh grew brawny as the limb of the
Banian; his arm waxed strong as the back bone of the shark; yea, his
voice grew sonorous as a conch.”

“And now he bent his whole soul to the accomplishment of the destiny
believed to be his. Nothing less than bodily to remove Ohonoo to the
center of the lagoon, in fulfillment of an old prophecy running
thus—When a certain island shall stir from its foundations and stand in
the middle of the still water, then shall the ruler of that island be
ruler of all Mardi.”

The task was hard, but how glorious the reward! So at it he went, and
all Ohonoo helped him. Not by hands, but by calling in the magicians.
Thus far, nevertheless, in vain. But Uhia had hopes.

Now, informed of all this, said Babbalanja to Media, “My lord, if the
continual looking-forward to something greater, be better than an
acquiescence in things present; then, wild as it is, this belief of
Uhia’s he should hug to his heart, as erewhile his wives. But my lord,
this faith it is, that robs his days of peace; his nights of sweet
unconsciousness. For holding himself foreordained to the dominion of
the entire Archipelago, he upbraids the gods for laggards, and curses
himself as deprived of his rights; nay, as having had wrested from him,
what he never possessed. Discontent dwarfs his horizon till he spans it
with his hand. ‘Most miserable of demi-gods,’ he cries, ‘here am I
cooped up in this insignificant islet, only one hundred leagues by
fifty, when scores of broad empires own me not for their lord.’ Yet
Uhia himself is envied. ‘Ah!’ cries Karrolono, one of his chieftains,
master of a snug little glen, ‘Here am I cabined in this paltry cell
among the mountains, when that great King Uhia is lord of the whole
island, and every cubic mile of matter therein.’ But this same
Karrolono is envied. ‘Hard, oh beggarly lot is mine,’ cries Donno, one
of his retainers. ‘Here am I fixed and screwed down to this paltry
plantation, when my lord Karrolono owns the whole glen, ten long
parasangs from cliff to sea.’ But Donno too is envied. ‘Alas, cursed
fate!’ cries his servitor Flavona. ‘Here am I made to trudge, sweat,
and labor all day, when Donno my master does nothing but command.’ But
others envy Flavona; and those who envy him are envied in turn; even
down to poor bed- ridden Manta, who dying of want, groans forth,
‘Abandoned wretch that I am! here I miserably perish, while so many
beggars gad about and live!’ But surely; none envy Manta! Yes; great
Uhia himself. ‘Ah!’ cries the king. ‘Here am I vexed and tormented by
ambition; no peace night nor day; my temples chafed sore by this cursed
crown that I wear; while that ignoble wight Manta, gives up the ghost
with none to molest him.’”

In vain we wandered up and down in this isle, and peered into its
innermost recesses: no Yillah was there.




CHAPTER XCII.
The God Keevi And The Precipice Of Mondo


One object of interest in Ohonoo was the original image of Keevi the
god of Thieves; hence, from time immemorial, the tutelar deity of the
isle.

His shrine was a natural niche in a cliff, walling in the valley of
Monlova And here stood Keevi, with his five eyes, ten hands, and three
pair of legs, equipped at all points for the vocation over which he
presided. Of mighty girth, his arms terminated in hands, every finger a
limb, spreading in multiplied digits: palms twice five, and fifty
fingers.

According to the legend, Keevi fell from a golden cloud, burying
himself to the thighs in the earth, tearing up the soil all round.
Three meditative mortals, strolling by at the time, had a narrow
escape.

A wonderful recital; but none of us voyagers durst flout it. Did they
not show us the identical spot where the idol fell? We descended into
the hollow, now verdant. Questionless, Keevi himself would have vouched
for the truth of the miracle, had he not been unfortunately dumb. But
by far the most cogent, and pointed argument advanced in support of
this story, is a spear which the priests of Keevi brought forth, for
Babbalanja to view.

“Let me look at it closer,” said Babbalanja.

And turning it over and over and curiously inspecting it, “Wonderful
spear,” he cried. “Doubtless, my reverends, this self-same spear must
have persuaded many recusants!”

“Nay, the most stubborn,” they answered.

“And all afterward quoted as additional authority for the truth of the
legend?”

“Assuredly.”

From the sea to the shrine of this god, the fine valley of Monlova
ascends with a gentle gradation, hardly perceptible; but upon turning
round toward the water, one is surprised to find himself high elevated
above its surface. Pass on, and the same silent ascent deceives you;
and the valley contracts; and on both sides the cliffs advance; till at
last you come to a narrow space, shouldered by buttresses of rock.
Beyond, through this cleft, all is blue sky. If the Trades blow high,
and you came unawares upon the spot, you would think Keevi himself
pushing you forward with all his hands; so powerful is the current of
air rushing through this elevated defile. But expostulate not with the
tornado that blows you along; sail on; but soft; look down; the land
breaks off in one sheer descent of a thousand feet, right down to the
wide plain below. So sudden and profound this precipice, that you seem
to look off from one world to another. In a dreamy, sunny day, the
spangled plain beneath assumes an uncertain fleeting aspect. Had you a
deep-sea-lead you would almost be tempted to sound the ocean-haze at
your feet.

This, mortal! is the precipice of Mondo.

From this brink, spear in hand, sprang fifty rebel warriors, driven
back into the vale by a superior force. Finding no spot to stand at
bay, with a fierce shout they took the fatal leap.

Said Mohi, “Their souls ascended, ere their bodies touched.”

This tragical event took place many generations gone by, and now a
dizzy, devious way conducts one, firm of foot, from the verge to the
plain. But none ever ascended. So perilous, indeed, is the descent
itself, that the islanders venture not the feat, without invoking
supernatural aid. Flanking the precipice beneath beetling rocks, stand
the guardian deities of Mondo; and on altars before them, are placed
the propitiatory offerings of the traveler.

To the right of the brink of the precipice, and far over it, projects a
narrow ledge. The test of legitimacy in the Ohonoo monarchs is to stand
hereon, arms folded, and javelins darting by.

And there in his youth Uhia stood.

“How felt you, cousin?” asked Media.

“Like the King of Ohonoo,” he replied. “As I shall again feel; when
King of all Mardi.”




CHAPTER XCIII.
Babbalanja Steps In Between Mohi And Yoomy; And Yoomy Relates A Legend


Embarking from Ohonoo, we at length found ourselves gliding by the
pleasant shores of Tupia, an islet which according to Braid-Beard had
for ages remained uninhabited by man. Much curiosity being expressed to
know more of the isle, Mohi was about to turn over his chronicles,
when, with modesty, the minstrel Yoomy interposed; saying, that if my
Lord Media permitted, he himself would relate the legend. From its
nature, deeming the same pertaining to his province as poet; though, as
yet, it had not been versified. But he added, that true pearl shells
rang musically, though not strung upon a cord.

Upon this presumptuous interference, Mohi looked highly offended; and
nervously twitching his beard, uttered something invidious about
frippery young poetasters being too full of silly imaginings to tell a
plain tale.

Said Yoomy, in reply, adjusting his turban, “Old Mohi, let us not
clash. I honor your calling; but, with submission, your chronicles are
more wild than my cantos. I deal in pure conceits of my own; which have
a shapeliness and a unity, however unsubstantial; but you, Braid-Beard,
deal in mangled realities. In all your chapters, you yourself grope in
the dark. Much truth is not in thee, historian. Besides, Mohi: my songs
perpetuate many things which you sage scribes entirely overlook. Have
you not oftentimes come to me, and my ever dewy ballads for
information, in which you and your musty old chronicles were
deficient?”

“In much that is precious, Mohi, we poets are the true historians; we
embalm; you corrode.”

To this Mohi, with some ire, was about to make answer, when, flinging
over his shoulder a new fold of his mantle, Babbalanja spoke thus:
“Peace, rivals. As Bardianna has it, like all who dispute upon
pretensions of their own, you are each nearest the right, when you
speak of the other; and furthest therefrom, when you speak of
yourselves.”

Said Mohi and Yoomy in a breath, “Who sought your opinion, philosopher?
you filcher from old Bardianna, and monger of maxims!”

“You, who have so long marked the vices of Mardi, that you flatter
yourself you have none of your own,” added Braid-Beard.

“You, who only seem wise, because of the contrasting follies of others,
and not of any great wisdom in yourself,” continued the minstrel, with
unwonted asperity.”

“Now here,” said Babballanja, “am I charged upon by a bearded old ram,
and a lamb. One butting with his carious and brittle old frontlet; the
other pushing with its silly head before its horns are sprouted. But
this comes of being impartial. Had I espoused the cause of Yoomy versus
Mohi, or that of Mohi versus Yoomy, I had been sure to have had at
least one voice in my favor. The impartialist insulteth all sides,
saith old Bardianna; but smite with but one hand, and the other shall
be kissed.—Oh incomparable Bardianna!”

“Will no one lay that troubled old ghost,” exclaimed Media, devoutly.
“Proceed with thy legend, Yoomy; and see to it, that it be brief; for I
mistrust me, these legends do but test the patience of the hearers. But
draw a long breath, and begin.”

“A long bow,” muttered Mohi.

And Yoomy began.

“It is now about ten hundred thousand moons—”

“Great Oro! How long since, say you?” cried Mohi, making Gothic arches
of his brows.

Looking at him disdainfully, but vouchsafing no reply, Yoomy began over
again.

“It is now above ten hundred thousand moons, since there died the last
of a marvelous race, once inhabiting the very shores by which we are
sailing. They were a very diminutive people, only a few inches high—”

“Stop, minstrel,” cried Mohi; “how many pennyweights did they weigh?”

Continued Yoomy, unheedingly, “They were covered all over with a soft,
silky down, like that on the rind of the Avee; and there grew upon
their heads a green, lance-leaved vine, of a most delicate texture. For
convenience, the manikins reduced their tendrils, sporting, nothing but
coronals. Whereas, priding themselves upon the redundancy of their
tresses, the little maidens assiduously watered them with the early dew
of the morning; so that all wreathed and festooned with verdure, they
moved about in arbors, trailing after them trains.”

“I can hear no more,” exclaimed Mohi, stopping his ears.

Continued Yoomy, “The damsels lured to their bowers, certain red-
plumaged insect-birds, and taught them to nestle therein, and warble;
which, with the pleasant vibrating of the leaves, when the little
maidens moved, produced a strange blending of sweet, singing sounds.
The little maidens embraced not with their arms, but with their viny
locks; whose tendrils instinctively twined about their lovers, till
both were lost in the bower.”

“And what then?” asked Mohi, who, notwithstanding the fingers in his
ears, somehow contrived to listen; “What then?”

Vouchsafing no reply, Yoomy went on.

“At a certain age, but while yet the maidens were very young, their
vines bore blossoms. Ah! fatal symptoms. For soon as they burst, the
maidens died in their arbors; and were buried in the valleys; and their
vines spread forth; and the flowers bloomed; but the maidens themselves
were no more. And now disdaining the earth, the vines shot upward:
climbing to the topmost boughs of the trees; and flowering in the
sunshine forever and aye.”

Yoomy here paused for a space; but presently continued:

“The little eyes of the people of Tupia were very strange to behold:
full of stars, that shone from within, like the Pleiades, deep- bosomed
in blue. And like the stars, they were intolerant of sunlight; and
slumbering through the day, the people of Tupia only went abroad by
night. But it was chiefly when the moon was at full, that they were
mostly in spirits.

“Then the little manikins would dive down into the sea, and rove about
in the coral groves, making love to the mermaids. Or, racing round,
make a mad merry night of it with the sea-urchins:—plucking the
reverend mullets by the beard; serenading the turtles in their cells;
worrying the sea-nettles; or tormenting with their antics the touchy
torpedos. Sometimes they went prying about with the starfish, that have
an eye at the end of each ray; and often with coral files in their
hands stole upon slumbering swordfish, slyly blunting their weapons. In
short, these stout little manikins were passionately fond of the sea,
and swore by wave and billow, that sooner or later they would embark
thereon in nautilus shells, and spend the rest of their roving days
thousands of inches from Tupia. Too true, they were shameless little
rakes. Oft would they return to their sweethearts, sporting musky
girdles of sea-kelp, tasseled with green little pouches of grass,
brimful of seed-pearls; and jingling their coin in the ears of the
damsels, throw out inuendoes about the beautiful and bountiful
mermaids: how wealthy and amorous they were, and how they delighted in
the company of the brave gallants of Tupia. Ah! at such heartless
bravadoes, how mourned the poor little nymphs. Deep into their arbors
they went; and their little hearts burst like rose-buds, and filled the
whole air with an odorous grief. But when their lovers were gentle and
true, no happier maidens haunted the lilies than they. By some mystical
process they wrought minute balls of light: touchy, mercurial globules,
very hard to handle; and with these, at pitch and toss, they played in
the groves. Or mischievously inclined, they toiled all night long at
braiding the moon-beams together, and entangling the plaited end to a
bough; so that at night, the poor planet had much ado to set.”

Here Yoomy once more was mute.

“Pause you to invent as you go on?” said old Mohi, elevating his chin,
till his beard was horizontal.

Yoomy resumed.

“Little or nothing more, my masters, is extant of the legend; only it
must be mentioned, that these little people were very tasteful in their
personal adornings; the manikins wearing girdles of fragrant leaves,
and necklaces of aromatic seeds; and the little damsels, not content
with their vines, and their verdure, sporting pearls in their ears;
bracelets of wee little porpoise teeth; and oftentimes dancing with
their mates in the moonlit glades, coquettishly fanned themselves with
the transparent wings of the flying fish.”

“Now, I appeal to you, royal Media; to you, noble Taji; to you,
Babbalanja;” said the chronicler, with an impressive gesture, “whether
this seems a credible history: Yoomy has invented.”

“But perhaps he has entertained, old Mohi,” said Babbalanja.

“He has not spoken the truth,” persisted the chronicler.

“Mohi,” said Babbalanja, “truth is in things, and not in words: truth
is voiceless; so at least saith old Bardianna. And I, Babbalanja,
assert, that what are vulgarly called fictions are as much realities as
the gross mattock of Dididi, the digger of trenches; for things visible
are but conceits of the eye: things imaginative, conceits of the fancy.
If duped by one, we are equally duped by the other.”

“Clear as this water,” said Yoomy.

“Opaque as this paddle,” said Mohi, “But, come now, thou oracle, if all
things are deceptive, tell us what is truth?”

“The old interrogatory; did they not ask it when the world began? But
ask it no more. As old Bardianna hath it, that question is more final
than any answer.”




CHAPTER XCIV.
Of That Jolly Old Lord, Borabolla; And That Jolly Island Of His,
Mondoldo; And Of The Fish-Ponds, And The Hereafters Of Fish


Drawing near Mondoldo, our next place of destination, we were greeted
by six fine canoes, gayly tricked out with streamers, and all alive
with the gestures of their occupants. King Borabolla and court were
hastening to welcome our approach; Media, unbeknown to all, having
notified him at the Banquet of the Five-and-Twenty Kings, of our
intention to visit his dominions.

Soon, side by side, these canoes floated with ours; each barge of Odo
courteously flanked by those of Mondoldo.

Not long were we in identifying Borabolla: the portly, pleasant old
monarch, seated cross-legged upon a dais, projecting over the bow of
the largest canoe of the six, close-grappling to the side of the Sea
Elephant.

Was he not a goodly round sight to behold? Round all over; round of eye
and of head; and like the jolly round Earth, roundest and biggest about
the Equator. A girdle of red was his Equinoctial Line, giving a
compactness to his plumpness.

This old Borabolla permitted naught to come between his head and the
sun; not even gray hairs. Bald as a gourd, right down on his brazen
skull, the rays of the luminary converged.

He was all hilarity; full of allusions to the feast at Willamilla,
where he had done royal execution. Rare old Borabolla! thou wert made
for dining out; thy ample mouth an inlet for good cheer, and a
sally-port for good humor.

Bustling about on his dais, he now gave orders for the occupants of our
canoes to be summarily emptied into his own; saying, that in that
manner only did he allow guests to touch the beach of Mondoldo.

So, with no little trouble—for the waves were grown somewhat riotous—we
proceeded to comply; bethinking ourselves all the while, how annoying
is sometimes an over-strained act of hospitality.

We were now but little less than a mile from the shore. But what of
that? There was plenty of time, thought Borabolla, for a hasty lunch,
and the getting of a subsequent appetite ere we effected a landing. So
viands were produced; to which the guests were invited to pay heedful
attention; or take the consequences, and famish till the long voyage in
prospect was ended.

Soon the water shoaled (approaching land is like nearing truth in
metaphysics), and ere we yet touched the beach, Borabolla declared,
that we were already landed. Which paradoxical assertion implied, that
the hospitality of Mondoldo was such, that in all directions it
radiated far out upon the lagoon, embracing a great circle; so that no
canoe could sail by the island, without its occupants being so long its
guests.

In most hospitable vicinity to the water, was a fine large structure,
inclosed by a stockade; both rather dilapidated; as if the cost of
entertaining its guests, prevented outlays for repairing the place. But
it was one of Borabolla’s maxims, that generally your tumble-down old
homesteads yield the most entertainment; their very dilapidation
betokening their having seen good service in hospitality; whereas,
spruce-looking, finical portals, have a phiz full of meaning; for
niggards are oftentimes neat.

Now, after what has been said, who so silly as to fancy, that because
Borabolla’s mansion was inclosed by a stockade, that the same was
intended as a defense against guests? By no means. In the palisade was
a mighty breach, not an entrance-way, wide enough to admit six Daniel
Lamberts abreast.

“Look,” cried Borabolla, as landing we stepped toward the place. “Look
Media! look all. These gates, you here see, lashed back with osiers,
have been so lashed during my life-time; and just where they stand,
shall they rot; ay, they shall perish wide open.”

“But why have them at all?” inquired Media.

“Ah! there you have old Borabolla,” cried the other.

“No,” said Babbalanja, “a fence whose gate is ever kept open, seems
unnecessary, I grant; nevertheless, it gives a notable hint, otherwise
not so aptly conveyed; for is not the open gate the sign of the open
heart?”

“Right, right,” cried Borabolla; “so enter both, cousin Media;” and
with one hand smiting his chest, with the other he waved us on.

But if the stockade seemed all open gate, the structure within seemed
only a roof; for nothing but a slender pillar here and there, supported
it.

“This is my mode of building,” said Borabolla; “I will have no outside
to my palaces. Walls are superfluous. And to a high-minded guest, the
entering a narrow doorway is like passing under a yoke; every time he
goes in, or comes out, it reminds him, that he is being entertained at
the cost of another. So storm in all round.”

Within, was one wide field-bed; where reclining, we looked up to
endless rows of brown calabashes, and trenchers suspended along the
rafters; promissory of ample cheer as regiments of old hams in a
baronial refectory.

They were replenished with both meat and drink; the trenchers readily
accessible by means of cords; but the gourds containing arrack,
suspended neck downward, were within easy reach where they swung.

Seeing all these indications of hard roystering; like a cautious young
bridegroom at his own marriage merry-making, Taji stood on his guard.
And when Borabolla urged him to empty a gourd or two, by way of making
room in him for the incidental repast about to be served, Taji civilly
declined; not wishing to cumber the floor, before the cloth was laid.

Jarl, however, yielding to importunity, and unmindful of the unities of
time and place, went freely about, from gourd to gourd, concocting in
him a punch. At which, Samoa expressed much surprise, that he should be
so unobservant as not to know, that in Mardi, guests might be pressed
to demean themselves, without its being expected that so they would do.
A true toss-pot himself, he bode his time.

The second lunch over, Borabolla placed both hands to the ground, and
giving the sigh of the fat man, after three vigorous efforts, succeeded
in gaining his pins; which pins of his, were but small for his body;
insomuch that they hugely staggered about, under the fine old load they
carried.

The specific object of his thus striving after an erect posture, was to
put himself in motion, and conduct us to his fish-ponds, famous
throughout the Archipelago as the hobby of the king of Mondoldo.
Furthermore, as the great repast of the day, yet to take place, was to
be a grand piscatory one, our host was all anxiety, that we should have
a glimpse of our fish, while yet alive and hearty.

We were alarmed at perceiving, that certain servitors were preparing to
accompany us with trenchers of edibles. It begat the notion, that our
trip to the fish-ponds was to prove a long journey. But they were not
three hundred yards distant; though Borabolla being a veteran traveler,
never stirred from his abode without his battalion of butlers.

The ponds were four in number, close bordering the water, embracing
about an acre each, and situated in a low fen, draining several
valleys. The excavated soil was thrown up in dykes, made tight by being
beaten all over, while in a soft state, with the heavy, flat ends of
Palm stalks. Lying side by side, by three connecting trenches, these
ponds could be made to communicate at pleasure; while two additional
canals afforded means of letting in upon them the salt waters of the
lagoon on one hand, or those of an inland stream on the other. And by a
third canal with four branches, together or separately, they could be
partially drained. Thus, the waters could be mixed to suit any gills;
and the young fish taken from the sea, passed through a stated process
of freshening; so that by the time they graduated, the salt was well
out of them, like the brains out of some diplomaed collegians.

Fresh-water fish are only to be obtained in Mondoldo by the artificial
process above mentioned; as the streams and brooks abound not in trout
or other Waltonian prey.

Taken all floundering from the sea, Borabolla’s fish, passing through
their regular training for the table, and daily tended by their
keepers, in course of time became quite tame and communicative. To
prove which, calling his Head Ranger, the king bade him administer the
customary supply of edibles.

Accordingly, mouthfuls were thrown into the ponds. Whereupon, the fish
darted in a shoal toward the margin; some leaping out of the water in
their eagerness. Crouching on the bank, the Ranger now called several
by name, patted their scales, carrying on some heathenish nursery-talk,
like St. Anthony, in ancient Coptic, instilling virtuous principles
into his finny flock on the sea shore.

But alas, for the hair-shirted old dominie’s backsliding disciples.
For, of all nature’s animated kingdoms, fish are the most unchristian,
inhospitable, heartless, and cold-blooded of creatures. At least, so
seem they to strangers; though at bottom, somehow, they must be all
right. And truly it is not to be wondered at, that the very reverend
Anthony strove after the conversion of fish. For, whoso shall
Christianize, and by so doing, humanize the sharks, will do a greater
good, by the saving of human life in all time to come, than though he
made catechumens of the head-hunting Dyaks of Borneo, or the
blood-bibbing Battas of Sumatra. And are these Dyaks and Battas one
whit better than tiger-sharks? Nay, are they so good? Were a Batta your
intimate friend, you would often mistake an orang-outang for him; and
have orang-outangs immortal souls? True, the Battas believe in a
hereafter; but of what sort? Full of Blue-Beards and bloody bones. So,
also, the sharks; who hold that Paradise is one vast Pacific, ploughed
by navies of mortals, whom an endless gale forever drops into their
maws.

Not wholly a surmise. For, does it not appear a little unreasonable to
imagine, that there is any creature, fish, flesh, or fowl, so little in
love with life, as not to cherish hopes of a future state? Why does man
believe in it? One reason, reckoned cogent, is, that he desires it. Who
shall say, then, that the leviathan this day harpooned on the coast of
Japan, goes not straight to his ancestor, who rolled all Jonah, as a
sweet morsel, under his tongue?

Though herein, some sailors are slow believers, or at best hold
themselves in a state of philosophical suspense. Say they—“That
catastrophe took place in the Mediterranean; and the only whales
frequenting the Mediterranean, are of a sort having not a swallow large
enough to pass a man entire; for those Mediterranean whales feed upon
small things, as horses upon oats.” But hence, the sailors draw a rash
inference. Are not the Straits of Gibralter wide enough to admit a
sperm-whale, even though none have sailed through, since Nineveh and
the gourd in its suburbs dried up?

As for the possible hereafter of the whales; a creature eighty feet
long without stockings, and thirty feet round the waist before dinner,
is not inconsiderately to be consigned to annihilation.




CHAPTER XCV.
That Jolly Old Lord Borabolla Laughs On Both Sides Of His Face


“A very good palace, this, coz, for you and me,” said waddling old
Borabolla to Media, as, returned from our excursion, he slowly lowered
himself down to his mat, sighing like a grampus.

By this, he again made known the vastness of his hospitality, which led
him for the nonce to parcel out his kingdom with his guests.

But apart from these extravagant expressions of good feeling, Borabolla
was the prince of good fellows. His great tun of a person was
indispensable to the housing of his bullock-heart; under which, any
lean wight would have sunk. But alas! unlike Media and Taji, Borabolla,
though a crowned king, was accounted no demi-god; his obesity excluding
him from that honor. Indeed, in some quarters of Mardi, certain pagans
maintain, that no fat man can be even immortal. A dogma! truly, which
should be thrown to the dogs. For fat men are the salt and savor of the
earth; full of good humor, high spirits, fun, and all manner of
jollity. Their breath clears the atmosphere: their exhalations air the
world. Of men, they are the good measures; brimmed, heaped, pressed
down, piled up, and running over. They are as ships from Teneriffe;
swimming deep, full of old wine, and twenty steps down into their
holds. Soft and susceptible, all round they are easy of entreaty.
Wherefore, for all their rotundity, they are too often circumnavigated
by hatchet-faced knaves. Ah! a fat uncle, with a fat paunch, and a fat
purse, is a joy and a delight to all nephews; to philosophers, a
subject of endless speculation, as to how many droves of oxen and Lake
Eries of wine might have run through his great mill during the full
term of his mortal career. Fat men not immortal! This very instant, old
Lambert is rubbing his jolly abdomen in Paradise.

Now, to the fact of his not being rated a demi-god, was perhaps
ascribable the circumstance, that Borabolla comported himself with less
dignity, than was the wont of their Mardian majesties. And truth to
say, to have seen him regaling himself with one of his favorite
cuttle-fish, its long snaky arms and feelers instinctively twining
round his head as he ate; few intelligent observers would have opined
that the individual before them was the sovereign lord of Mondoldo.

But what of the banquet of fish? Shall we tell how the old king
ungirdled himself thereto; how as the feast waxed toward its close,
with one sad exception, he still remained sunny-sided all round; his
disc of a face joyous as the South Side of Madeira in the hilarious
season of grapes? Shall we tell how we all grew glad and frank; and how
the din of the dinner was heard far into night?

We will.

When Media ate slowly, Borabolla took him to task, bidding him dispatch
his viands more speedily.

Whereupon said Media “But Borabolla, my round fellow, that would
abridge the pleasure.”

“Not at all, my dear demi-god; do like me: eat fast and eat long.”

In the middle of the feast, a huge skin of wine was brought in. The
portly peltry of a goat; its horns embattling its effigy head; its
mouth the nozzle; and its long beard flowed to its jet-black hoofs.
With many ceremonial salams, the attendants bore it along, placing it
at one end of the convivial mats, full in front of Borabolla; where
seated upon its haunches it made one of the party.

Brimming a ram’s horn, the mellowest of bugles, Borabolla bowed to his
silent guest, and thus spoke—“In this wine, which yet smells of the
grape, I pledge you my reverend old toper, my lord Capricornus; you
alone have enough; and here’s full skins to the rest!”

“How jolly he is,” whispered Media to Babbalanja.

“Ay, his lungs laugh loud; but is laughing, rejoicing?”

“Help! help!” cried Borabolla “lay me down! lay me down! good gods,
what a twinge!”

The goblet fell from his hand; the purple flew from his wine to his
face; and Borabolla fell back into the arms of his servitors. “That
gout! that gout!” he groaned. “Lord! lord! no more cursed wine will I
drink!”

Then at ten paces distant, a clumsy attendant let fall a trencher—“Take
it off my foot, you knave!”

Afar off another entered gallanting a calabash—“Look out for my toe,
you hound!”

During all this, the attendants tenderly nursed him. And in good time,
with its thousand fangs, the gout-fiend departed for a while.

Reprieved, the old king brightened up; by degrees becoming jolly as
ever.

“Come! let us be merry again,” he cried, “what shall we eat? and what
shall we drink? that infernal gout is gone; come, what will your
worships have?”

So at it once more we went.

But of our feast, little more remains to be related than this;—that out
of it, grew a wondrous kindness between Borabolla and Jarl. Strange to
tell, from the first our fat host had regarded my Viking with a most
friendly eye. Still stranger to add, this feeling was returned. But
though they thus fancied each other, they were very unlike; Borabolla
and Jarl. Nevertheless, thus is it ever. And as the convex fits not
into the convex, but into the concave; so do men fit into their
opposites; and so fitted Borabolla’s arched paunch into Jarl’s,
hollowed out to receive it.

But how now? Borabolla was jolly and loud: Jarl demure and silent;
Borabolla a king: Jarl only a Viking;—how came they together? Very
plain, to repeat:—because they were heterogeneous; and hence the
affinity. But as the affinity between those chemical opposites chlorine
and hydrogen, is promoted by caloric; so the affinity between Borabolla
and Jarl was promoted by the warmth of the wine that they drank at this
feast. For of all blessed fluids, the juice of the grape is the
greatest foe to cohesion. True, it tightens the girdle; but then it
loosens the tongue, and opens the heart.

In sum, Borabolla loved Jarl; and Jarl, pleased with this sociable
monarch, for all his garrulity, esteemed him the most sensible old
gentleman and king he had as yet seen in Mardi. For this reason,
perhaps; that his talkativeness favored that silence in listeners,
which was my Viking’s delight in himself.

Repeatedly during the banquet, our host besought Taji to allow his
henchman to remain on the island, after the rest of our party should
depart; and he faithfully promised to surrender Jarl, whenever we
should return to claim him.

But though I harbored no distrust of Borabolla’s friendly intentions, I
could not so readily consent to his request; for with Jarl for my one
only companion, had I not both famished and feasted? was he not my only
link to things past?

Things past!—Ah Yillah! for all its mirth, and though we hunted wide,
we found thee not in Mondoldo.




CHAPTER XCVI.
Samoa A Surgeon


The second day of our stay in Mondoldo was signalized by a noteworthy
exhibition of the surgical skill of Samoa; who had often boasted, that
though well versed in the science of breaking men’s heads, he was
equally an adept in mending their crockery.

Overnight, Borabolla had directed his corps of sea-divers to repair
early on the morrow, to a noted section of the great Mardian reef, for
the purpose of procuring for our regalement some of the fine
Hawk’s-bill turtle, whose secret retreats were among the cells and
galleries of that submerged wall of coral, from whose foamy coping no
plummet dropped ever yet touched bottom.

These turtles were only to be obtained by diving far down under the
surface; and then swimming along horizontally, and peering into the
coral honeycomb; snatching at a flipper when seen, as at a pinion in a
range of billing dove-cotes.

As the king’s divers were thus employed, one of them, Karhownoo by
name, perceived a Devil-shark, so called, swimming wistfully toward him
from out his summer grotto in the reef. No way petrified by the sight,
and pursuing the usual method adopted by these divers in such
emergencies, Karhownoo, splashing the water, instantly swam toward the
stranger. But the shark, undaunted, advanced: a thing so unusual, and
fearful, that, in an agony of fright, the diver shot up for the
surface. Heedless, he looked not up as he went; and when within a few
inches of the open air, dashed his head against a projection of the
reef. He would have sank into the live tomb beneath, were it not that
three of his companions, standing on the brink, perceived his peril,
and dragged him into safety.

Seeing the poor fellow was insensible, they endeavored, ineffectually,
to revive him; and at last, placing him in their canoe, made all haste
for the shore. Here a crowd soon gathered, and the diver was borne to a
habitation, close adjoining Borabolla’s; whence, hearing of the
disaster, we sallied out to render assistance.

Upon entering the hut, the benevolent old king commanded it to be
cleared; and then proceeded to examine the sufferer.

The skull proved to be very badly fractured; in one place, splintered.

“Let me mend it,” said Samoa, with ardor.

And being told of his experience in such matters, Borabolla surrendered
the patient.

With a gourd of water, and a tappa cloth, the one-armed Upoluan
carefully washed the wound; and then calling for a sharp splinter of
bamboo, and a thin, semi-transparent cup of cocoa-nut shell, he went
about the operation: nothing less than the “Tomoti” (head-mending), in
other words the trepan.

The patient still continuing insensible, the fragments were disengaged
by help of a bamboo scalpel; when a piece of the drinking
cup—previously dipped in the milk of a cocoanut—was nicely fitted into
the vacancy, the skin as nicely adjusted over it, and the operation was
complete.

And now, while all present were crying out in admiration of Samoa’s
artistic skill, and Samoa himself stood complacently regarding his
workmanship, Babbalanja suggested, that it might be well to ascertain
whether the patient survived. When, upon sounding his heart, the diver
was found to be dead.

The bystanders loudly lamented; but declared the surgeon a man of
marvelous science.

Returning to Borabolla’s, much conversation ensued, concerning the sad
scene we had witnessed, which presently branched into a learned
discussion upon matters of surgery at large.

At length, Samoa regaled the company with a story; for the truth of
which no one but him can vouch, for no one but him was by, at the time;
though there is testimony to show that it involves nothing at variance
with the customs of certain barbarous tribes.

Read on.




CHAPTER XCVII.
Faith And Knowledge


A thing incredible is about to be related; but a thing may be
incredible and still be true; sometimes it is incredible because it is
true. And many infidels but disbelieve the least incredible things; and
many bigots reject the most obvious. But let us hold fast to all we
have; and stop all leaks in our faith; lest an opening, but of a hand’s
breadth, should sink our seventy-fours. The wide Atlantic can rush in
at one port-hole; and if we surrender a plank, we surrender the fleet.
Panoplied in all the armor of St. Paul, morion, hauberk, and greaves,
let us fight the Turks inch by inch, and yield them naught but our
corpse.

But let us not turn round upon friends, confounding them with foes. For
dissenters only assent to more than we. Though Milton was a heretic to
the creed of Athanasius, his faith exceeded that of Athanasius himself;
and the faith of Athanasius that of Thomas, the disciple, who with his
own eyes beheld the mark of the nails. Whence it comes that though we
be all Christians now, the best of us had perhaps been otherwise in the
days of Thomas.

The higher the intelligence, the more faith, and the less credulity:
Gabriel rejects more than we, but out-believes us all. The greatest
marvels are first truths; and first truths the last unto which we
attain. Things nearest are furthest off. Though your ear be next-door
to your brain, it is forever removed from your sight. Man has a more
comprehensive view of the moon, than the man in the moon himself. We
know the moon is round; he only infers it. It is because we ourselves
are in ourselves, that we know ourselves not. And it is only of our
easy faith, that we are not infidels throughout; and only of our lack
of faith, that we believe what we do.

In some universe-old truths, all mankind are disbelievers. Do you
believe that you lived three thousand years ago? That you were at the
taking of Tyre, were overwhelmed in Gomorrah? No. But for me, I was at
the subsiding of the Deluge, and helped swab the ground, and build the
first house. With the Israelites, I fainted in the wilderness; was in
court, when Solomon outdid all the judges before him. I, it was, who
suppressed the lost work of Manetho, on the Egyptian theology, as
containing mysteries not to be revealed to posterity, and things at war
with the canonical scriptures; I, who originated the conspiracy against
that purple murderer, Domitian; I, who in the senate moved, that great
and good Aurelian be emperor. I instigated the abdication of
Diocletian, and Charles the Fifth; I touched Isabella’s heart, that she
hearkened to Columbus. I am he, that from the king’s minions hid the
Charter in the old oak at Hartford; I harbored Goffe and Whalley: I am
the leader of the Mohawk masks, who in the Old Commonwealth’s harbor,
overboard threw the East India Company’s Souchong; I am the Vailed
Persian Prophet; I, the man in the iron mask; I, Junius.




CHAPTER XCVIII.
The Tale Of A Traveler


It was Samoa, who told the incredible tale; and he told it as a
traveler. But stay-at-homes say travelers lie. Yet a voyage to Ethiopia
would cure them of that; for few skeptics are travelers; fewer
travelers liars, though the proverb respecting them lies. It is false,
as some say, that Bruce was cousin-german to Baron Munchausen; but
true, as Bruce said, that the Abysinnians cut live steaks from their
cattle. It was, in good part, his villainous transcribers, who made
monstrosities of Mandeville’s travels. And though all liars go to
Gehenna; yet, assuming that Mandeville died before Dante; still, though
Dante took the census of Hell, we find not Sir John, under the likeness
of a roasted neat’s tongue, in that infernalest of infernos, The
Inferno.

But let not the truth be postponed. To the stand, Samoa, and through
your interpreter, speak.

Once upon a time, during his endless sea-rovings, the Upoluan was
called upon to cobble the head of a friend, grievously hurt in a
desperate fight of slings.

Upon examination, that part of the brain proving as much injured as the
cranium itself, a young pig was obtained; and preliminaries being over,
part of its live brain was placed in the cavity, the trepan
accomplished with cocoanut shell, and the scalp drawn over and secured.

This man died not, but lived. But from being a warrior of great sense
and spirit, he became a perverse-minded and piggish fellow, showing
many of the characteristics of his swinish grafting. He survived the
operation more than a year; at the end of that period, however, going
mad, and dying in his delirium.

Stoutly backed by the narrator, this anecdote was credited by some
present. But Babbalanja held out to the last.

“Yet, if this story be true,” said he, “and since it is well settled,
that our brains are somehow the organs of sense; then, I see not why
human reason could not be put into a pig, by letting into its cranium
the contents of a man’s. I have long thought, that men, pigs, and
plants, are but curious physiological experiments; and that science
would at last enable philosophers to produce new species of beings, by
somehow mixing, and concocting the essential ingredients of various
creatures; and so forming new combinations. My friend Atahalpa, the
astrologer and alchymist, has long had a jar, in which he has been
endeavoring to hatch a fairy, the ingredients being compounded
according to a receipt of his own.”

But little they heeded Babbalanja. It was the traveler’s tale that most
arrested attention.

Tough the thews, and tough the tales of Samoa.




CHAPTER XCIX.
“Marnee Ora, Ora Marnee”


During the afternoon of the day of the diver’s decease, preparations
were making for paying the last rites to his remains, and carrying them
by torch-light to their sepulcher, the sea; for, as in Odo, so was the
custom here.

Meanwhile, all over the isle, to and fro went heralds, dismally
arrayed, beating shark-skin drums; and, at intervals, crying—“A man is
dead; let no fires be kindled; have mercy, oh Oro!—Let no canoes put to
sea till the burial. This night, oh Oro!—Let no food be cooked.”

And ever and anon, passed and repassed these, others in brave attire;
with castanets of pearl shells, making gay music; and these sang—

Be merry, oh men of Mondoldo,
    A maiden this night is to wed:
Be merry, oh damsels of Mardi,—
    Flowers, flowers for the bridal bed.


Informed that the preliminary rites were about being rendered, we
repaired to the arbor, whither the body had been removed.

Arrayed in white, it was laid out on a mat; its arms mutely crossed,
between its lips an asphodel; at the feet, a withered hawthorn bough.

The relatives were wailing, and cutting themselves with shells, so that
blood flowed, and spotted their vesture.

Upon remonstrating with the most abandoned of these mourners, the wife
of the diver, she exclaimed, “Yes; great is the pain, but greater my
affliction.”

Another, the deaf sire of the dead, went staggering about, and groping;
saying, that he was now quite blind; for some months previous he had
lost one eye in the death of his eldest son and now the other was gone.

“I am childless,” he cried; “henceforth call me Roi Mori,” that is,
Twice-Blind.

While the relatives were thus violently lamenting, the rest of the
company occasionally scratched themselves with their shells; but very
slightly, and mostly on the soles of their feet; from long exposure,
quite callous. This was interrupted, however, when the real mourners
averted their eyes; though at no time was there any deviation in the
length of their faces.

But on all sides, lamentations afresh broke forth, upon the appearance
of a person who had been called in to assist in solemnizing the
obsequies, and also to console the afflicted.

In rotundity, he was another Borabolla. He puffed and panted.

As he approached the corpse, a sobbing silence ensued; when holding the
hand of the dead, between his, the stranger thus spoke:—

“Mourn not, oh friends of Karhownoo, that this your brother lives not.
His wounded head pains him no more; he would not feel it, did a javelin
pierce him. Yea; Karhownoo is exempt from all the ills and evils of
this miserable Mardi!”

Hereupon, the Twice-Blind, who being deaf, heard not what was said,
tore his gray hair, and cried, “Alas! alas! my boy; thou wert the
merriest man in Mardi, and now thy pranks are over!”

But the other proceeded—“Mourn not, I say, oh friends of Karhownoo; the
dead whom ye deplore is happier than the living; is not his spirit in
the aerial isles?”

“True! true!” responded the raving wife, mingling her blood with her
tears, “my own poor hapless Karhownoo is thrice happy in Paradise!” And
anew she wailed, and lacerated her cheeks.

“Rave not, I say.”

But she only raved the more.

And now the good stranger departed; saying, he must hie to a wedding,
waiting his presence in an arbor adjoining.

Understanding that the removal of the body would not take place till
midnight, we thought to behold the mode of marrying in Mondoldo.

Drawing near the place, we were greeted by merry voices, and much
singing, which greatly increased when the good stranger was perceived.

Gayly arrayed in fine robes, with plumes on their heads, the bride and
groom stood in the middle of a joyous throng, in readiness for the
nuptial bond to be tied.

Standing before them, the stranger was given a cord, so bedecked with
flowers, as to disguise its stout fibers; and taking: the bride’s
hands, he bound them together to a ritual chant; about her neck, in
festoons, disposing the flowery ends of the cord. Then turning to the
groom, he was given another, also beflowered; but attached thereto was
a great stone, very much carved, and stained; indeed, so every way
disguised, that a person not knowing what it was, and lifting it, would
be greatly amazed at its weight. This cord being attached to the waist
of the groom, he leaned over toward the bride, by reason of the burden
of the drop.

All present now united in a chant, and danced about the happy pair, who
meanwhile looked ill at ease; the one being so bound by the hands, and
the other solely weighed down by his stone.

A pause ensuing, the good stranger, turning them back to back, thus
spoke:—

“By thy flowery gyves, oh bride, I make thee a wife; and by thy
burdensome stone, oh groom, I make thee a husband. Live and be happy,
both; for the wise and good Oro hath placed us in Mardi to be glad.
Doth not all nature rejoice in her green groves and her flowers? and
woo and wed not the fowls of the air, trilling their bliss in their
bowers? Live then, and be happy, oh bride and groom; for Oro is
offended with the unhappy, since he meant them to be gay.”

And the ceremony ended with a joyful feast.

But not all nuptials in Mardi were like these. Others were wedded with
different rites; without the stone and flowery gyves. These were they
who plighted their troth with tears not smiles, and made responses in
the heart.

Returning from the house of the merry to the house of the mournful, we
lingered till midnight to witness the issuing forth of the body.

By torch light, numerous canoes, with paddlers standing by, were drawn
up on the beach, to accommodate those who purposed following the poor
diver to his home.

The remains embarked, some confusion ensued concerning the occupancy of
the rest of the shallops. At last the procession glided off, our party
included. Two by two, forming a long line of torches trailing round the
isle, the canoes all headed toward the opening in the reef.

For a time, a decorous silence was preserved; but presently, some
whispering was heard; perhaps melancholy discoursing touching the close
of the diver’s career. But we were shocked to discover, that poor
Karhownoo was not much in their thoughts; they were conversing about
the next bread-fruit harvest, and the recent arrival of King Media and
party at Mondoldo. From far in advance, however, were heard the
lamentations of the true mourners, the relatives of the diver.

Passing the reef, and sailing a little distance therefrom, the canoes
were disposed in a circle; the one bearing the corpse in the center.
Certain ceremonies over, the body was committed to the waves; the white
foam lighting up the last, long plunge of the diver, to see sights more
strange than ever he saw in the brooding cells of the Turtle Reef.

And now, while in the still midnight, all present were gazing down into
the ocean, watching the white wake of the corpse, ever and anon
illuminated by sparkles, an unknown voice was heard, and all started
and vacantly stared, as this wild song was sung:—

We drop our dead in the sea,
    The bottomless, bottomless sea;
Each bubble a hollow sigh,
    As it sinks forever and aye.

We drop our dead in the sea,—
    The dead reek not of aught;
We drop our dead in the sea,—
    The sea ne’er gives it a thought.

Sink, sink, oh corpse, still sink,
    Far down in the bottomless sea,
Where the unknown forms do prowl,
    Down, down in the bottomless sea.

’Tis night above, and night all round,
    And night will it be with thee;
As thou sinkest, and sinkest for aye,
    Deeper down in the bottomless sea.


The mysterious voice died away; no sign of the corpse was now seen; and
mute with amaze, the company long listed to the low moan of the billows
and the sad sough of the breeze.

At last, without speaking, the obsequies were concluded by sliding into
the ocean a carved tablet of Palmetto, to mark the place of the burial.
But a wave-crest received it, and fast it floated away.

Returning to the isle, long silence prevailed. But at length, as if the
scene in which they had just taken part, afresh reminded them of the
mournful event which had called them together, the company again
recurred to it; some present, sadly and incidentally alluding to
Borabolla’s banquet of turtle, thereby postponed.




CHAPTER C.
The Pursuer Himself Is Pursued


Next morning, when much to the chagrin of Borabolla we were preparing
to quit his isle, came tidings to the palace, of a wonderful event,
occurring in one of the “Motoos,” or little islets of the great reef;
which “Motoo” was included in the dominions of the king.

The men who brought these tidings were highly excited; and no sooner
did they make known what they knew, than all Mondoldo was in a tumult
of marveling.

Their story was this.

Going at day break to the Motoo to fish, they perceived a strange proa
beached on its seaward shore; and presently were hailed by voices; and
saw among the palm trees, three specter-like men, who were not of
Mardi.

The first amazement of the fishermen over, in reply to their eager
questions, the strangers related, that they were the survivors of a
company of men, natives of some unknown island to the northeast; whence
they had embarked for another country, distant three days’ sail to the
southward of theirs. But falling in with a terrible adventure, in which
their sire had been slain, they altered their course to pursue the
fugitive who murdered him; one and all vowing, never more to see home,
until their father’s fate was avenged. The murderer’s proa outsailing
theirs, soon ran out of sight; yet after him they blindly steered by
day and by night: steering by the blood- red star in Bootes. Soon, a
violent gale overtook them; driving them to and fro; leaving them they
knew not where. But still struggling against strange currents, at times
counteracting their sailing, they drifted on their way; nigh to
famishing for water; and no shore in sight. In long calms, in vain they
held up their dry gourds to heaven, and cried “send us a breeze, sweet
gods!” The calm still brooded; and ere it was gone, all but three
gasped; and dead from thirst, were plunged into the sea. The breeze
which followed the calm, soon brought them in sight of a low,
uninhabited isle; where tarrying many days, they laid in good store of
cocoanuts and water, and again embarked.

The next land they saw was Mardi; and they landed on the Motoo, still
intent on revenge.

This recital filled Taji with horror.

Who could these avengers be, but the sons of him I had slain. I had
thought them far hence, and myself forgotten; and now, like adders,
they started up in my path, as I hunted for Yillah.

But I dissembled my thoughts.

Without waiting to hear more, Borabolla, all curiosity to behold the
strangers, instantly dispatched to the Motoo one of his fleetest
canoes, with orders to return with the voyagers.

Ere long they came in sight; and perceiving that strange pros in tow of
the king’s, Samoa cried out: “Lo! Taji, the canoe that was going to
Tedaidee!”

Too true; the same double-keeled craft, now sorely broken, the fatal
dais in wild disarray: the canoe, the canoe of Aleema! And with it came
the spearmen three, who, when the Chamois was fleeing from their bow,
had poised their javelins. But so wan their aspect now, their faces
looked like skulls.

Then came over me the wild dream of Yillah; and, for a space, like a
madman, I raved. It seemed as if the mysterious damsel must still be
there; the rescue yet to be achieved. In my delirium I rushed upon the
skeletons, as they landed—“Hide not the maiden!” But interposing, Media
led me aside; when my transports abated.

Now, instantly, the strangers knew who I was; and, brandishing their
javelins, they rushed upon me, as I had on them, with a yell. But
deeming us all mad, the crowd held us apart; when, writhing in the arms
that restrained them, the pale specters foamed out their curses again
and again: “Oh murderer! white curses upon thee! Bleached be thy soul
with our hate! Living, our brethren cursed thee; and dying, dry-lipped,
they cursed thee again. They died not through famishing for water, but
for revenge upon thee! Thy blood, their thirst would have slaked!”

I lay fainting against the hard-throbbing heart of Samoa, while they
showered their yells through the air. Once more, in my thoughts, the
green corpse of the priest drifted by.

Among the people of Mondoldo, a violent commotion now raged. They were
amazed at Taji’s recognition by the strangers, and at the deadly
ferocity they betrayed.

Rallying upon this, and perceiving that by divulging all they knew,
these sons of Aleema might stir up the Islanders against me, I resolved
to anticipate their story; and, turning to Borabolla, said— “In these
strangers, oh, king! you behold the survivors of a band we encountered
on our voyage. From them I rescued a maiden, called Yillah, whom they
were carrying captive. Little more of their history do I know.”

“Their maledictions?” exclaimed Borabolla.

“Are they not delirious with suffering?” I cried. “They know not what
they say.”

So, moved by all this, he commanded them to be guarded, and conducted
within his palisade; and having supplied them with cheer, entered into
earnest discourse. Yet all the while, the pale strangers on me fixed
their eyes; deep, dry, crater-like hollows, lurid with flames,
reflected from the fear-frozen glacier, my soul.

But though their hatred appalled, spite of that spell, again the sweet
dream of Yillah stole over me, with all the mysterious things by her
narrated, but left unexplained. And now, before me were those who might
reveal the lost maiden’s whole history, previous to the fatal affray.

Thus impelled, I besought them to disclose what they knew.

But, “Where now is your Yillah?” they cried. “Is the murderer wedded
and merry? Bring forth the maiden!”

Yet, though they tore out my heart’s core, I told them not of my loss.

Then, anxious, to learn the history of Yillah, all present commanded
them to divulge it; and breathlessly I heard what follows.

“Of Yillah, we know only this:—that many moons ago, a mighty canoe,
full of beings, white, like this murderer Taji, touched at our island
of Amma. Received with wonder, they were worshiped as gods; were
feasted all over the land. Their chief was a tower to behold; and with
him, was a being, whose cheeks were of the color of the red coral; her
eye, tender as the blue of the sky. Every day our people brought her
offerings of fruit and flowers; which last she would not retain for
herself; but hung them round the neck of her child, Yillah; then only
an infant in her mother’s arms; a bud, nestling close to a flower,
full-blown. All went well between our people and the gods, till at last
they slew three of our countrymen, charged with stealing from their
great canoe. Our warriors retired to the hills, brooding over revenge.
Three days went by; when by night, descending to the plain, in silence
they embarked; gained the great vessel, and slaughtered every soul but
Yillah. The bud was torn from the flower; and, by our father Aleema,
was carried to the Valley of Ardair; there set apart as a sacred
offering for Apo, our deity. Many moons passed; and there arose a
tumult, hostile to our sire’s longer holding custody of Yillah; when,
foreseeing that the holy glen would ere long be burst open, he embarked
the maiden in yonder canoe, to accelerate her sacrifice at the great
shrine of Apo, in Tedaidee.—The rest thou knowest, murderer!”

“Yillah! Yillah!” now hunted again that sound through my soul. “Oh,
Yillah! too late, too late have I learned what thou art!”

Apprised of the disappearance of their former captive, the meager
strangers exulted; declaring that Apo had taken her to himself. For me,
ere long, my blood they would quaff from my skull.

But though I shrunk from their horrible threats, I dissembled anew; and
turning, again swore that they raved.

“Ay!” they retorted, “we rave and raven for you; and your white heart
will we have!”

Perceiving the violence of their rage, and persuaded from what I said,
that much suffering at sea must have maddened them; Borabolla thought
fit to confine them for the present; so that they could not molest me.




CHAPTER CI.
The Iris


That evening, in the groves, came to me three gliding forms:—Hautia’s
heralds: the Iris mixed with nettles. Said Yoomy, “A cruel message!”

With the right hand, the second syren presented glossy, green wax-
myrtle berries, those that burn like tapers; the third, a lily of the
valley, crushed in its own broad leaf.

This done, they earnestly eyed Yoomy; who, after much pondering,
said—“I speak for Hautia; who by these berries says, I will enlighten
you.”

“Oh, give me then that light! say, where is Yillah?” and I rushed upon
the heralds.

But eluding me, they looked reproachfully at Yoomy; and seemed
offended.

“Then, I am wrong,” said Yoomy. “It is thus:—Taji, you have been
enlightened, but the lily you seek is crushed.”

Then fell my heart, and the phantoms nodded; flinging upon me
bilberries, like rose pearls, which bruised against my skin, left
stains.

Waving oleanders, they retreated.

“Harm! treachery! beware!” cried Yoomy.

Then they glided through the wood: one showering dead leaves along the
path I trod, the others gayly waving bunches of spring-crocuses,
yellow, white, and purple; and thus they vanished.

Said Yoomy, “Sad your path, but merry Hautia’s.”

“Then merry may she be, whoe’er she is; and though woe be mine, I turn
not from that to Hautia; nor ever will I woo her, though she woo me
till I die;—though Yillah never bless my eyes.”




CHAPTER CII.
They Depart From Mondoldo


Night passed; and next morning we made preparations for leaving
Mondoldo that day.

But fearing anew, lest after our departure, the men of Amma might stir
up against me the people of the isle, I determined to yield to the
earnest solicitations of Borabolla, and leave Jarl behind, for a
remembrance of Taji; if necessary, to vindicate his name. Apprised
hereof, my follower was loth to acquiesce. His guiltless spirit feared
not the strangers: less selfish considerations prevailed. He was
willing to remain on the island for a time, but not without me. Yet,
setting forth my reasons; and assuring him, that our tour would not be
long in completing, when we would not fail to return, previous to
sailing for Odo, he at last, but reluctantly, assented.

At Mondoldo, we also parted with Samoa. Whether it was, that he feared
the avengers, whom he may have thought would follow on my track; or
whether the islands of Mardi answered not in attractiveness to the
picture his fancy had painted; or whether the restraint put upon him by
the domineering presence of King Media, was too irksome withal; or
whether, indeed, he relished not those disquisitions with which
Babbalanja regaled us: however it may have been, certain it was, that
Samoa was impatient of the voyage. He besought permission to return to
Odo, there to await my return; and a canoe of Mondoldo being about to
proceed in that direction, permission was granted; and departing for
the other side of the island, from thence he embarked.

Long after, dark tidings came, that at early dawn he had been found
dead in the canoe: three arrows in his side.

Yoomy was at a loss to account for the departure of Samoa; who, while
ashore, had expressed much desire to roam.

Media, however, declared that he must be returning to some inamorata.

But Babbalanja averred, that the Upoluan was not the first man, who had
turned back, after beginning a voyage like our own.

To this, after musing, Yoomy assented. Indeed, I had noticed, that
already the Warbler had abated those sanguine assurances of success,
with which he had departed from Odo. The futility of our search thus
far, seemed ominous to him, of the end.

On the eve of embarking, we were accompanied to the beach by Borabolla;
who, with his own hand, suspended from the shark’s mouth of Media’s
canoe, three red-ripe bunches of plantains, a farewell gift to his
guests.

Though he spoke not a word, Jarl was long in taking leave. His eyes
seemed to say, I will see you no more.

At length we pushed from the strand; Borabolla waving his adieus with a
green leaf of banana; our comrade ruefully eyeing the receding canoes;
and the multitude loudly invoking for us a prosperous voyage.

But to my horror, there suddenly dashed through the crowd, the three
specter sons of Aleema, escaped from their prison. With clenched hands,
they stood in the water, and cursed me anew. And with that curse in our
sails, we swept off.




CHAPTER CIII.
As They Sail


As the canoes now glided across the lagoon, I gave myself up to
reverie; and revolving over all that the men of Amma had rehearsed of
the history of Yillah, I one by one unriddled the mysteries, before so
baffling. Now, all was made plain: no secret remaining, but the
subsequent event of her disappearance. Yes, Hautia! enlightened I had
been but where was Yillah?

Then I recalled that last interview with Hautia’s messengers, so full
of enigmas; and wondered, whether Yoomy had interpreted aright. Unseen,
and unsolicited; still pursuing me with omens, with taunts, and with
wooings, mysterious Hautia appalled me. Vaguely I began to fear her.
And the thought, that perhaps again and again, her heralds would haunt
me, filled me with a nameless dread, which I almost shrank from
acknowledging. Inwardly I prayed, that never more they might appear.

While full of these thoughts, Media interrupted them by saying, that
the minstrel was about to begin one of his chants, a thing of his own
composing; and therefore, as he himself said, all critics must be
lenient; for Yoomy, at times, not always, was a timid youth,
distrustful of his own sweet genius for poesy.

The words were about a curious hereafter, believed in by some people in
Mardi: a sort of nocturnal Paradise, where the sun and its heat are
excluded: one long, lunar day, with twinkling stars to keep company.

THE SONG
Far off in the sea is Marlena,
A land of shades and streams,
A land of many delights.
Dark and bold, thy shores,
Marlena; But green, and timorous, thy soft knolls,
Crouching behind the woodlands.
All shady thy hills; all gleaming thy springs,
Like eyes in the earth looking at you.
How charming thy haunts Marlena!—
Oh, the waters that flow through Onimoo:
Oh, the leaves that rustle through Ponoo:
Oh, the roses that blossom in Tarma:
Come, and see the valley of Vina:
How sweet, how sweet, the Isles from Hind:
’Tis aye afternoon of the full, full moon,
And ever the season of fruit,
And ever the hour of flowers,
And never the time of rains and gales,
All in and about Marlena.
Soft sigh the boughs in the stilly air,
Soft lap the beach the billows there;
And in the woods or by the streams,
You needs must nod in the Land of Dreams.


“Yoomy,” said old Mohi with a yawn, “you composed that song, then, did
you?”

“I did,” said Yoomy, placing his turban a little to one side.

“Then, minstrel, you shall sing me to sleep every night, especially
with that song of Marlena; it is soporific as the airs of Nora-Bamma.”

“Mean you, old man, that my lines, setting forth the luxurious repose
to be enjoyed hereafter, are composed with such skill, that the
description begets the reality; or would you ironically suggest, that
the song is a sleepy thing itself?”

“An important discrimination,” said Media; “which mean you, Mohi?”

“Now, are you not a silly boy,” said Babbalanja, “when from the
ambiguity of his speech, you could so easily have derived something
flattering, thus to seek to extract unpleasantness from it? Be wise,
Yoomy; and hereafter, whenever a remark like that seems equivocal, be
sure to wrest commendation from it, though you torture it to the
quick.”

“And most sure am I, that I would ever do so; but often I so incline to
a distrust of my powers, that I am far more keenly alive to censure,
than to praise; and always deem it the more sincere of the two; and no
praise so much elates me, as censure depresses.”




CHAPTER CIV.
Wherein Babbalanja Broaches A Diabolical Theory, And In His Own Person
Proves It


“A truce!” cried Media, “here comes a gallant before the wind.—Look,
Taji!”

Turning, we descried a sharp-prowed canoe, dashing on, under the
pressure of an immense triangular sail, whose outer edges were
streaming with long, crimson pennons. Flying before it, were several
small craft, belonging to the poorer sort of Islanders.

“Out of his way there, ye laggards,” cried Media, “or that mad prince,
Tribonnora, will ride over ye with a rush!”

“And who is Tribonnora,” said Babbalanja, “that he thus bravely diverts
himself, running down innocent paddlers?”

“A harum-scarum young chief,” replied Media, “heir to three islands; he
likes nothing better than the sport you now see see him at.”

“He must be possessed by a devil,” said Mohi.

Said Babbalanja, “Then he is only like all of us.” “What say you?”
cried Media.

“I say, as old Bardianna in the Nine hundred and ninety ninth book of
his immortal Ponderings saith, that all men—”

“As I live, my lord, he has swamped three canoes,” cried Mohi, pointing
off the beam.

But just then a fiery fin-back whale, having broken into the paddock of
the lagoon, threw up a high fountain of foam, almost under Tribonnora’s
nose; who, quickly turning about his canoe, cur-like slunk off; his
steering-paddle between his legs.

Comments over; “Babbalanja, you were going to quote,” said Media.
“Proceed.”

“Thank you, my lord. Says old Bardianna, ‘All men are possessed by
devils; but as these devils are sent into men, and kept in them, for an
additional punishment; not garrisoning a fortress, but limboed in a
bridewell; so, it may be more just to say, that the devils themselves
are possessed by men, not men by them.’”

“Faith!” cried Media, “though sometimes a bore, your old Bardianna is a
trump.”

“I have long been of that mind, my lord. But let me go on. Says
Bardianna, ‘Devils are divers;—strong devils, and weak devils; knowing
devils, and silly devils; mad devils, and mild devils; devils, merely
devils; devils, themselves bedeviled; devils, doubly bedeviled.”

“And in the devil’s name, what sort of a devil is yours?” cried Mohi.

“Of him anon; interrupt me not, old man. Thus, then, my lord, as devils
are divers, divers are the devils in men. Whence, the wide difference
we see. But after all, the main difference is this:—that one man’s
devil is only more of a devil than another’s; and be bedeviled as much
as you will; yet, may you perform the most bedeviled of actions with
impunity, so long as you only bedevil yourself. For it is only when
your deviltry injures another, that the other devils conspire to
confine yours for a mad one. That is to say, if you be easily handled.
For there are many bedeviled Bedlamites in Mardi, doing an infinity of
mischief, who are too brawny in the arms to be tied.”

“A very devilish doctrine that,” cried Mohi. “I don’t believe it.”

“My lord,” said Babbalanja, “here’s collateral proof;—the sage lawgiver
Yamjamma, who flourished long before Bardianna, roundly asserts, that
all men who knowingly do evil are bedeviled; for good is happiness;
happiness the object of living; and evil is not good.”

“If the sage Yamjamma said that,” said old Mohi, “the sage Yamjamma
might have bettered the saying; it’s not quite so plain as it might
be.”

“Yamjamma disdained to be plain; he scorned to be fully comprehended by
mortals. Like all oracles, he dealt in dark sayings. But old Bardianna
was of another sort; he spoke right out, going straight to the point
like a javelin; especially when he laid it down for a universal maxim,
that minus exceptions, all men are bedeviled.”

“Of course, then,” said Media, “you include yourself among the number.”

“Most assuredly; and so did old Bardianna; who somewhere says, that
being thoroughly bedeviled himself, he was so much the better qualified
to discourse upon the deviltries of his neighbors. But in another place
he seems to contradict himself, by asserting, that he is not so
sensible of his own deviltry as of other people’s.”

“Hold!” cried Media, “who have we here?” and he pointed ahead of our
prow to three men in the water, urging themselves along, each with a
paddle.

We made haste to overtake them.

“Who are you?” said Media, “where from, and where bound?”

“From Variora,” they answered, “and bound to Mondoldo.” “And did that
devil Tribonnora swamp your canoe?” asked Media, offering to help them
into ours.

“We had no such useless incumbrance to lose,” they replied, resting on
their backs, and panting with their exertions. “If we had had a canoe,
we would have had to paddle it along with us; whereas we have only our
bodies to paddle.”

“You are a parcel of loons,” exclaimed Media. “But go your ways, if you
are satisfied with your locomotion, well and good.”

“Now, it is an extreme case, I grant,” said Babbalanja, “but those poor
devils there, help to establish old Bardianna’s position. They belong
to that species of our bedeviled race, called simpletons; but their
devils harming none but themselves, are permitted to be at large with
the fish. Whereas, Tribonnora’s devil, who daily runs down canoes,
drowning their occupants, belongs to the species of out and out devils;
but being high in station, and strongly backed by kith and kin,
Tribonnora can not be mastered, and put in a strait jacket. For myself,
I think my devil is some where between these two extremes; at any rate,
he belongs to that class of devils who harm not other devils.”

“I am not so sure of that,” retorted Media. “Methinks this doctrine of
yours, about all mankind being bedeviled, will work a deal of mischief;
seeing that by implication it absolves you mortals from moral
accountability. Further-more; as your doctrine is exceedingly evil, by
Yamjamma’s theory it follows, that you must be proportionably
bedeviled; and since it harms others, your devil is of the number of
those whom it is best to limbo; and since he is one of those that can
be limboed, limboed he shall be in you.”

And so saying, he humorously commanded his attendants to lay hands upon
the bedeviled philosopher, and place a bandage upon his mouth, that he
might no more disseminate his devilish doctrine.

Against this, Babbalanja demurred, protesting that he was no
orang-outang, to be so rudely handled.

“Better and better,” said Media, “you but illustrate Bardianna’s
theory; that men are not sensible of their being bedeviled.”

Thus tantalized, Babbalanja displayed few signs of philosophy.

Whereupon, said Media, “Assuredly his devil is foaming; behold his
mouth!” And he commanded him to be bound hand and foot.

At length, seeing all resistance ineffectual, Babbalanja submitted; but
not without many objurgations.

Presently, however, they released him; when Media inquired, how he
relished the application of his theory; and whether he was still’ of
old Bardianna’s mind?

To which, haughtily adjusting his robe, Babbalanja replied, “The strong
arm, my lord, is no argument, though it overcomes all logic.”

 END OF VOL. I. 

Vol. II.

1864




CONTENTS

 MARDI
 CHAPTER I. — Maramma
 CHAPTER II. — They land
 CHAPTER III. — They pass through the Woods
 CHAPTER IV. — Hivohitee MDCCCXLVIII
 CHAPTER V. — They visit the great Morai
 CHAPTER VI. — They discourse of the Gods of Mardi, and Braid-Beard tells of one Foni
 CHAPTER VII. — They visit the Lake of Yammo
 CHAPTER VIII. — They Meet The Pilgrims At The Temple Of Oro
 CHAPTER IX. — They discourse of Alma
 CHAPTER X. — Mohi tells of one Ravoo, and they land to visit Hevaneva, a flourishing Artisan
 CHAPTER XI. — A Nursery-tale of Babbalanja’s
 CHAPTER XII. — Landing to visit Hivohitee the Pontiff, they encounter an extraordinary old Hermit; with whom Yoomy has a confidential Interview, but learns little
 CHAPTER XIII. — Babbalanja endeavors to explain the Mystery
 CHAPTER XIV. — Taji receives Tidings and Omens
 CHAPTER XV. — Dreams
 CHAPTER XVI. — Media and Babbalanja discourse
 CHAPTER XVII. — They regale themselves with their Pipes
 CHAPTER XVIII. — They visit an extraordinary old Antiquary
 CHAPTER XIX. — They go down into the Catacombs
 CHAPTER XX. — Babbalanja quotes from an antique Pagan; and earnestly presses it upon the Company, that what he recites is not his but another’s
 CHAPTER XXI. — They visit a wealthy old Pauper
 CHAPTER XXII. — Yoomy sings some odd Verses, and Babbalanja quotes from the old Authors right and left
 CHAPTER XXIII. — What manner of Men the Tapparians were
 CHAPTER XXIV. — Their adventures upon landing at Pimminee
 CHAPTER XXV. — A, I, and O
 CHAPTER XXVI. — A Reception-day at Pimminee
 CHAPTER XXVII. — Babbalanja falleth upon Pimminee Tooth and Nail
 CHAPTER XXVIII. — Babbalanja regales the Company with some Sandwiches
 CHAPTER XXIX. — They still remain upon the Rock
 CHAPTER XXX. — Behind and Before
 CHAPTER XXXI. — Babbalanja discourses in the Dark
 CHAPTER XXXII. — My Lord Media summons Mohi to the Stand
 CHAPTER XXXIII. — Wherein Babbalanja and Yoomy embrace
 CHAPTER XXXIV. — Of the Isle of Diranda
 CHAPTER XXXV. — They visit the Lords Piko and Hello
 CHAPTER XXXVI. — They attend the Games
 CHAPTER XXXVII. — Taji still hunted, and beckoned
 CHAPTER XXXVIII. — They embark from Diranda
 CHAPTER XXXIX. — Wherein Babbalanja discourses of himself
 CHAPTER XL. — Of the Sorcerers in the Isle of Minda
 CHAPTER XLI. — Chiefly of Sing Bello
 CHAPTER XLII. — Dominora and Vivenza
 CHAPTER XLIII. — They land at Dominora
 CHAPTER XLIV. — Through Dominora, they wander after Yillah
 CHAPTER XLV. — They behold King Bello’s State Canoe
 CHAPTER XLVI. — Wherein Babbalanja bows thrice
 CHAPTER XLVII. — Babbalanja philosophizes, and my Lord Media passes round the Calabashes
 CHAPTER XLVIII. — They sail round an Island without landing; and talk round a Subject without getting at it
 CHAPTER XLIX. — They draw nigh to Porpheero; where they behold a terrific Eruption
 CHAPTER L. — Wherein King Media celebrates the Glories of Autumn, the Minstrel, the Promise of Spring
 CHAPTER LI. — In which Azzageddi seems to use Babbalanja for a Mouth-Piece
 CHAPTER LII. — The charming Yoomy sings
 CHAPTER LIII. — They draw nigh unto Land
 CHAPTER LIV. — They visit the great central Temple of Vivenza
 CHAPTER LV. — Wherein Babbalanja comments upon the Speech of Alanno
 CHAPTER LVI. — A Scene in the Land of Warwicks, or King-Makers
 CHAPTER LVII. — They hearken unto a Voice from the Gods
 CHAPTER LVIII. — They visit the extreme South of Vivenza
 CHAPTER LIX. — They converse of the Mollusca, Kings, Toad-Stools and other Matters
 CHAPTER LX. — Wherein, that gallant Gentleman and Demi-God, King Media, Scepter in Hand, throws himself into the Breach
 CHAPTER LXI. — They round the stormy Cape of Capes
 CHAPTER LXII. — They encounter Gold-Hunters
 CHAPTER LXIII. — They seek through the Isles of Palms; and pass the Isles of Myrrh
 CHAPTER LXIV. — Concentric, inward, with Mardi’s Reef, they leave their Wake around the World
 CHAPTER LXV. — Sailing on
 CHAPTER LXVI. — A flight of Nightingales from Yoomy’s Mouth
 CHAPTER LXVII. — They visit one Doxodox
 CHAPTER LXVIII. — King Media dreams
 CHAPTER LXIX. — After a long Interval, by Night they are becalmed
 CHAPTER LXX. — They land at Hooloomooloo
 CHAPTER LXXI. — A Book from the “Ponderings of old Bardianna”
 CHAPTER LXXII. — Babbalanja starts to his Feet
 CHAPTER LXXIII. — At last, the last Mention is made of old Bardianna; and His last Will and Testament is recited at Length
 CHAPTER LXXIV. — A Death-cloud sweeps by them, as they sail
 CHAPTER LXXV. — They visit the palmy King Abrazza
 CHAPTER LXXVI. — Some pleasant, shady Talk in the Groves, between my Lords Abrazza and Media, Babbalanja, Mohi, and Yoomy
 CHAPTER LXXVII. — They sup
 CHAPTER LXXVIII. — They embark
 CHAPTER LXXIX. — Babbalanja at the Full of the Moon
 CHAPTER LXXX. — Morning
 CHAPTER LXXXI. — L’ultima sera
 CHAPTER LXXXII. — They sail from Night to Day
 CHAPTER LXXXIII. — They land
 CHAPTER LXXXIV. — Babbalanja relates to them a Vision
 CHAPTER LXXXV. — They depart from Serenia
 CHAPTER LXXXVI. — They meet the Phantoms
 CHAPTER LXXXVII. — They draw nigh to Flozella
 CHAPTER LXXXVIII. — They land
 CHAPTER LXXXIX. — They enter the Bower of Hautia
 CHAPTER XC. — Taji with Hautia
 CHAPTER XCI. — Mardi behind: an Ocean before




MARDI




CHAPTER I.
Maramma


We were now voyaging straight for Maramma; where lived and reigned, in
mystery, the High Pontiff of the adjoining isles: prince, priest, and
god, in his own proper person: great lord paramount over many kings in
Mardi; his hands full of scepters and crosiers.

Soon, rounding a lofty and insulated shore, the great central peak of
the island came in sight; domineering over the neighboring hills; the
same aspiring pinnacle, descried in drawing near the archipelago in the
Chamois.

“Tall Peak of Ofo!” cried Babbalanja, “how comes it that thy shadow so
broods over Mardi; flinging new shades upon spots already shaded by the
hill-sides; shade upon shade!”

“Yet, so it is,” said Yoomy, sadly, “that where that shadow falls, gay
flowers refuse to spring; and men long dwelling therein become shady of
face and of soul. ‘Hast thou come from out the shadows of Ofo?’
inquires the stranger, of one with a clouded brow.”

“It was by this same peak,” said Mohi, “that the nimble god Roo, a
great sinner above, came down from the skies, a very long time ago.
Three skips and a jump, and he landed on the plain. But alas, poor Roo!
though easy the descent, there was no climbing back.”

“No wonder, then,” said Babbalanja, “that the peak is inaccessible to
man. Though, with a strange infatuation, many still make pilgrimages
thereto; and wearily climb and climb, till slipping from the rocks,
they fall headlong backward, and oftentimes perish at its base.”

“Ay,” said Mohi, “in vain, on all sides of the Peak, various paths are
tried; in vain new ones are cut through the cliffs and the brambles:—
Ofo yet remains inaccessible.”

“Nevertheless,” said Babbalanja, “by some it is believed, that those,
who by dint of hard struggling climb so high as to become invisible
from the plain; that these have attained the summit; though others much
doubt, whether their becoming invisible is not because of their having
fallen, and perished by the way.”

“And wherefore,” said Media, “do you mortals undertake the ascent at
all? why not be content on the plain? and even if attainable, what
would you do upon that lofty, clouded summit? Or how can you hope to
breathe that rarefied air, unfitted for your human lungs?”

“True, my lord,” said Babbalanja; “and Bardianna asserts that the plain
alone was intended for man; who should be content to dwell under the
shade of its groves, though the roots thereof descend into the darkness
of the earth. But, my lord, you well know, that there are those in
Mardi, who secretly regard all stories connected with this peak, as
inventions of the people of Maramma. They deny that any thing is to be
gained by making a pilgrimage thereto. And for warranty, they appeal to
the sayings of the great prophet Alma.”

Cried Mohi, “But Alma is also quoted by others, in vindication of the
pilgrimages to Ofo. They declare that the prophet himself was the first
pilgrim that thitherward journeyed: that from thence he departed to the
skies.”

Now, excepting this same peak, Maramma is all rolling hill and dale,
like the sea after a storm; which then seems not to roll, but to stand
still, poising its mountains. Yet the landscape of Maramma has not the
merriness of meadows; partly because of the shadow of Ofo, and partly
because of the solemn groves in which the Morais and temples are
buried.

According to Mohi, not one solitary tree bearing fruit, not one
esculent root, grows in all the isle; the population wholly depending
upon the large tribute remitted from the neighboring shores.

“It is not that the soil is unproductive,” said Mohi, “that these
things are so. It is extremely fertile; but the inhabitants say that it
would be wrong to make a Bread-fruit orchard of the holy island.”

“And hence, my lord,” said Babbalanja, “while others are charged with
the business of their temporal welfare, these Islanders take no thought
of the morrow; and broad Maramma lies one fertile waste in the lagoon.”




CHAPTER II.
They Land


Coming close to the island, the pennons and trappings of our canoes
were removed; and Vee-Vee was commanded to descend from the shark’s
mouth; and for a time to lay aside his conch. In token of reverence,
our paddlers also stripped to the waist; an example which even Media
followed; though, as a king, the same homage he rendered, was at times
rendered himself.

At every place, hitherto visited, joyous crowds stood ready to hail our
arrival; but the shores of Maramma were silent, and forlorn.

Said Babbalanja, “It looks not as if the lost one were here.”

At length we landed in a little cove nigh a valley, which Mohi called
Uma; and here in silence we beached our canoes.

But presently, there came to us an old man, with a beard white as the
mane of the pale horse. He was clad in a midnight robe. He fanned
himself with a fan of faded leaves. A child led him by the hand, for he
was blind, wearing a green plantain leaf over his plaited brow.

Him, Media accosted, making mention who we were, and on what errand we
came: to seek out Yillah, and behold the isle.

Whereupon Pani, for such was his name, gave us a courteous reception;
and lavishly promised to discover sweet Yillah; declaring that in
Maramma, if any where, the long-lost maiden must be found. He assured
us, that throughout the whole land he would lead us; leaving no place,
desirable to be searched, unexplored.

And so saying, he conducted us to his dwelling, for refreshment and
repose.

It was large and lofty. Near by, however, were many miserable hovels,
with squalid inmates. But the old man’s retreat was exceedingly
comfortable; especially abounding in mats for lounging; his rafters
were bowed down by calabashes of good cheer.

During the repast which ensued, blind Pani, freely partaking, enlarged
upon the merit of abstinence; declaring that a thatch overhead, and a
cocoanut tree, comprised all that was necessary for the temporal
welfare of a Mardian. More than this, he assured us was sinful.

He now made known, that he officiated as guide in this quarter of the
country; and that as he had renounced all other pursuits to devote
himself to showing strangers the island; and more particularly the best
way to ascend lofty Ofo; he was necessitated to seek remuneration for
his toil.

“My lord,” then whispered Mohi to Media “the great prophet Alma always
declared, that, without charge, this island was free to all.”

“What recompense do you desire, old man?” said Media to Pani.

“What I seek is but little:—twenty rolls of fine tappa; two score mats
of best upland grass; one canoe-load of bread-fruit and yams; ten
gourds of wine; and forty strings of teeth;—you are a large company,
but my requisitions are small.”

“Very small,” said Mohi.

“You are extortionate, good Pani,” said Media. “And what wants an aged
mortal like you with all these things?”

“I thought superfluities were worthless; nay, sinful,” said Babbalanja.

“Is not this your habitation already more than abundantly supplied with
all desirable furnishings?” asked Yoomy.

“I am but a lowly laborer,” said the old man, meekly crossing his arms,
“but does not the lowliest laborer ask and receive his reward? and
shall I miss mine?—But I beg charity of none. What I ask, I demand; and
in the dread name of great Alma, who appointed me a guide.” And to and
fro he strode, groping as he went.

Marking his blindness, whispered Babbalanja to Media, “My lord,
methinks this Pani must be a poor guide. In his journeys inland, his
little child leads him; why not, then, take the guide’s guide?”

But Pani would not part with the child.

Then said Mohi in a low voice, “My lord Media, though I am no appointed
guide; yet, will I undertake to lead you aright over all this island;
for I am an old man, and have been here oft by myself; though I can not
undertake to conduct you up the peak of Ofo, and to the more secret
temples.”

Then Pani said: “and what mortal may this be, who pretends to thread
the labyrinthine wilds of Maramma? Beware!”

“He is one with eyes that see,” made answer Babbalanja.

“Follow him not,” said Pani, “for he will lead thee astray; no Yillah
will he find; and having no warrant as a guide, the curses of Alma will
accompany him.”

Now, this was not altogether without effect; for Pani and his fathers
before him had always filled the office of guide.

Nevertheless, Media at last decided, that, this time, Mohi should
conduct us; which being communicated to Pani, he desired us to remove
from his roof. So withdrawing to the skirt of a neighboring grove, we
lingered awhile, to refresh ourselves for the journey in prospect.

As we here reclined, there came up from the sea-side a party of
pilgrims, but newly arrived.

Apprised of their coming, Pani and his child went out to meet them; and
standing in the path he cried, “I am the appointed guide; in the name
of Alma I conduct all pilgrims to the temples.”

“This must be the worthy Pani,” said one of the strangers, turning upon
the rest.

“Let us take him, then, for our guide,” cried they; and all drew near.

But upon accosting him; they were told, that he guided none without
recompense.

And now, being informed, that the foremost of the pilgrims was one
Divino, a wealthy chief of a distant island, Pani demanded of him his
requital.

But the other demurred; and by many soft speeches at length abated the
recompense to three promissory cocoanuts, which he covenanted to send
Pani at some future day.

The next pilgrim accosted, was a sad-eyed maiden, in decent but scanty
raiment; who without seeking to diminish Pani’s demands promptly placed
in his hands a small hoard of the money of Mardi.

“Take it, holy guide,” she said, “it is all I have.”

But the third pilgrim, one Fanna, a hale matron, in handsome apparel,
needed no asking to bestow her goods. Calling upon her attendants to
advance with their burdens, she quickly unrolled them; and wound round
and round Pani, fold after fold of the costliest tappas; and filled
both his hands with teeth; and his mouth with some savory marmalade;
and poured oil upon his head; and knelt and besought of him a blessing.

“From the bottom of my heart I bless thee,” said Pani; and still
holding her hands exclaimed, “Take example from this woman, oh Divino;
and do ye likewise, ye pilgrims all.”

“Not to-day,” said Divino.

“We are not rich, like unto Fauna,” said the rest.

Now, the next pilgrim was a very old and miserable man; stone-blind,
covered with rags; and supporting his steps with a staff.

“My recompense,” said Pani.

“Alas! I have naught to give. Behold my poverty.”

“I can not see,” replied Pani; but feeling of his garments, he said,
“Thou wouldst deceive me; hast thou not this robe, and this staff?”

“Oh! Merciful Pani, take not my all!” wailed the pilgrim. But his
worthless gaberdine was thrust into the dwelling of the guide.

Meanwhile, the matron was still enveloping Pani in her interminable
tappas.

But the sad-eyed maiden, removing her upper mantle, threw it over the
naked form of the beggar.

The fifth pilgrim was a youth of an open, ingenuous aspect; and with an
eye, full of eyes; his step was light.

“Who art thou?” cried Pani, as the stripling touched him in passing.

“I go to ascend the Peak,” said the boy.

“Then take me for guide.”

“No, I am strong and lithesome. Alone must I go.”

“But how knowest thou the way?”

“There are many ways: the right one I must seek for myself.”

“Ah, poor deluded one,” sighed Pani; “but thus is it ever with youth;
and rejecting the monitions of wisdom, suffer they must. Go on, and
perish!”

Turning, the boy exclaimed—“Though I act counter to thy counsels, oh
Pani, I but follow the divine instinct in me.”

“Poor youth!” murmured Babbalanja. “How earnestly he struggles in his
bonds. But though rejecting a guide, still he clings to that legend of
the Peak.”

The rest of the pilgrims now tarried with the guide, preparing for
their journey inland.




CHAPTER III.
They Pass Through The Woods


Refreshed by our stay in the grove, we rose, and placed ourselves under
the guidance of Mohi; who went on in advance.

Winding our way among jungles, we came to a deep hollow, planted with
one gigantic palm-shaft, belted round by saplings, springing from its
roots. But, Laocoon-like, sire and sons stood locked in the serpent
folds of gnarled, distorted banians; and the banian-bark, eating into
their vital wood, corrupted their veins of sap, till all those
palm-nuts were poisoned chalices.

Near by stood clean-limbed, comely manchineels, with lustrous leaves
and golden fruit. You would have deemed them Trees of Life; but
underneath their branches grew no blade of grass, no herb, nor moss;
the bare earth was scorched by heaven’s own dews, filtrated through
that fatal foliage.

Farther on, there frowned a grove of blended banian boughs,
thick-ranked manchineels, and many a upas; their summits gilded by the
sun; but below, deep shadows, darkening night-shade ferns, and
mandrakes. Buried in their midst, and dimly seen among large leaves,
all halberd-shaped, were piles of stone, supporting falling temples of
bamboo. Thereon frogs leaped in dampness, trailing round their slime.
Thick hung the rafters with lines of pendant sloths; the upas trees
dropped darkness round; so dense the shade, nocturnal birds found there
perpetual night; and, throve on poisoned air. Owls hooted from dead
boughs; or, one by one, sailed by on silent pinions; cranes stalked
abroad, or brooded, in the marshes; adders hissed; bats smote the
darkness; ravens croaked; and vampires, fixed on slumbering lizards,
fanned the sultry air.




CHAPTER IV.
Hivohitee MDCCCXLVIII


Now, those doleful woodlands passed, straightway converse was renewed,
and much discourse took place, concerning Hivohitee, Pontiff of the
isle.

For, during our first friendly conversation with Pani, Media had
inquired for Hivohitee, and sought to know in what part of the island
he abode.

Whereto Pani had replied, that the Pontiff would be invisible for
several days to come; being engaged with particular company.

And upon further inquiry, as to who were the personages monopolizing
his hospitalities, Media was dumb when informed, that they were no
other than certain incorporeal deities from above, passing the
Capricorn Solstice at Maramma.

As on we journeyed, much curiosity being expressed to know more of the
Pontiff and his guests, old Mohi, familiar with these things, was
commanded to enlighten the company. He complied; and his recital was
not a little significant, of the occasional credulity of chroniclers.

According to his statement, the deities entertained by Hivohitee
belonged to the third class of immortals. These, however, were far
elevated above the corporeal demi-gods of Mardi. Indeed, in Hivohitee’s
eyes, the greatest demi-gods were as gourds. Little wonder, then, that
their superiors were accounted the most genteel characters on his
visiting list.

These immortals were wonderfully fastidious and dainty as to the
atmosphere they breathed; inhaling no sublunary air, but that of the
elevated interior; where the Pontiff had a rural lodge, for the special
accommodation of impalpable guests; who were entertained at very small
cost; dinners being unnecessary, and dormitories superfluous.

But Hivohitee permitted not the presence of these celestial grandees,
to interfere with his own solid comfort. Passing his mornings in highly
intensified chat, he thrice reclined at his ease; partaking of a fine
plantain-pudding, and pouring out from a calabash of celestial old
wine; meanwhile, carrying on the flow of soul with his guests. And
truly, the sight of their entertainer thus enjoying himself in the
flesh, while they themselves starved on the ether, must have been
exceedingly provoking to these aristocratic and aerial strangers.

It was reported, furthermore, that Hivohitee, one of the haughtiest of
Pontiffs, purposely treated his angelical guests thus cavalierly; in
order to convince them, that though a denizen of earth; a sublunarian;
and in respect of heaven, a mere provincial; he (Hivohitee) accounted
himself full as good as seraphim from the capital; and that too at the
Capricorn Solstice, or any other time of the year. Strongly bent was
Hivohitee upon humbling their supercilious pretensions.

Besides, was he not accounted a great god in the land? supreme? having
power of life and death? essaying the deposition of kings? and dwelling
in moody state, all by himself, in the goodliest island of Mardi?
Though here, be it said, that his assumptions of temporal supremacy
were but seldom made good by express interference with the secular
concerns of the neighboring monarchs; who, by force of arms, were too
apt to argue against his claims to authority; however, in theory, they
bowed to it. And now, for the genealogy of Hivohitee; for eighteen
hundred and forty-seven Hivohitees were alleged to have gone before
him. He came in a right line from the divine Hivohitee I.: the original
grantee of the empire of men’s souls and the first swayer of a crosier.
The present Pontiff’s descent was unquestionable; his dignity having
been transmitted through none but heirs male; the whole procession of
High Priests being the fruit of successive marriages between uterine
brother and sister. A conjunction deemed incestuous in some lands; but,
here, held the only fit channel for the pure transmission of elevated
rank.

Added to the hereditary appellation, Hivohitee, which simply denoted
the sacerdotal station of the Pontiffs, and was but seldom employed in
current discourse, they were individualized by a distinctive name,
bestowed upon them at birth. And the degree of consideration in which
they were held, may be inferred from the fact, that during the lifetime
of a Pontiff, the leading sound in his name was banned to ordinary
uses. Whence, at every new accession to the archiepiscopal throne, it
came to pass, that multitudes of words and phrases were either
essentially modified, or wholly dropped. Wherefore, the language of
Maramma was incessantly fluctuating; and had become so full of
jargonings, that the birds in the groves were greatly puzzled; not
knowing where lay the virtue of sounds, so incoherent.

And, in a good measure, this held true of all tongues spoken throughout
the Archipelago; the birds marveling at mankind, and mankind at the
birds; wondering how they could continually sing; when, for all man
knew to the contrary, it was impossible they could be holding
intelligent discourse. And thus, though for thousands of years, men and
birds had been dwelling together in Mardi, they remained wholly
ignorant of each other’s secrets; the Islander regarding the fowl as a
senseless songster, forever in the clouds; and the fowl him, as a
screeching crane, destitute of pinions and lofty aspirations.

Over and above numerous other miraculous powers imputed to the Pontiffs
as spiritual potentates, there was ascribed to them one special
privilege of a secular nature: that of healing with a touch the bites
of the ravenous sharks, swarming throughout the lagoon. With these they
were supposed to be upon the most friendly terms; according to popular
accounts, sociably bathing with them in the sea; permitting them to rub
their noses against their priestly thighs; playfully mouthing their
hands, with all their tiers of teeth.

At the ordination of a Pontiff, the ceremony was not deemed complete,
until embarking in his barge, he was saluted High Priest by three
sharks drawing near; with teeth turned up, swimming beside his canoe.

These monsters were deified in Maramma; had altars there; it was deemed
worse than homicide to kill one. “And what if they destroy human life?”
say the Islanders, “are they not sacred?”

Now many more wonderful things were related touching Hivohitee; and
though one could not but doubt the validity of many prerogatives
ascribed to him, it was nevertheless hard to do otherwise, than
entertain for the Pontiff that sort of profound consideration, which
all render to those who indisputably possess the power of quenching
human life with a wish.




CHAPTER V.
They Visit The Great Morai


As garrulous guide to the party, Braid-Beard soon brought us nigh the
great Morai of Maramma, the burial-place of the Pontiffs, and a rural
promenade, for certain idols there inhabiting.

Our way now led through the bed of a shallow water-course; Mohi
observing, as we went, that our feet were being washed at every step;
whereas, to tread the dusty earth would be to desecrate the holy Morai,
by transferring thereto, the base soil of less sacred ground.

Here and there, thatched arbors were thrown over the stream, for the
accommodation of devotees; who, in these consecrated waters, issuing
from a spring in the Morai, bathed their garments, that long life might
ensue. Yet, as Braid-Beard assured us, sometimes it happened, that
divers feeble old men zealously donning their raiment immediately after
immersion became afflicted with rheumatics; and instances were related
of their falling down dead, in this their pursuit of longevity.

Coming to the Morai, we found it inclosed by a wall; and while the rest
were surmounting it, Mohi was busily engaged in the apparently childish
occupation of collecting pebbles. Of these, however, to our no small
surprise, he presently made use, by irreverently throwing them at all
objects to which he was desirous of directing attention. In this
manner, was pointed out a black boar’s head, suspended from a bough.
Full twenty of these sentries were on post in the neighboring trees.

Proceeding, we came to a hillock of bone-dry sand, resting upon the
otherwise loamy soil. Possessing a secret, preservative virtue, this
sand had, ages ago, been brought from a distant land, to furnish a
sepulcher for the Pontiffs; who here, side by side, and sire by son,
slumbered all peacefully in the fellowship of the grave. Mohi declared,
that were the sepulcher to be opened, it would be the resurrection of
the whole line of High Priests. “But a resurrection of bones, after
all,” said Babbalanja, ever osseous in his allusions to the departed.

Passing on, we came to a number of Runic-looking stones, all over
hieroglyphical inscriptions, and placed round an elliptical aperture;
where welled up the sacred spring of the Morai, clear as crystal, and
showing through its waters, two tiers of sharp, tusk-like stones; the
mouth of Oro, so called; and it was held, that if any secular hand
should be immersed in the spring, straight upon it those stony jaws
would close.

We next came to a large image of a dark-hued stone, representing a
burly man, with an overgrown head, and abdomen hollowed out, and open
for inspection; therein, were relics of bones. Before this image we
paused. And whether or no it was Mohi’s purpose to make us tourists
quake with his recitals, his revelations were far from agreeable. At
certain seasons, human beings were offered to the idol, which being an
epicure in the matter of sacrifices, would accept of no ordinary fare.
To insure his digestion, all indirect routes to the interior were
avoided; the sacrifices being packed in the ventricle itself.

Near to this image of Doleema, so called, a solitary forest-tree was
pointed out; leafless and dead to the core. But from its boughs hang
numerous baskets, brimming over with melons, grapes, and guavas. And
daily these baskets were replenished.

As we here stood, there passed a hungry figure, in ragged raiment:
hollow cheeks, and hollow eyes. Wistfully he eyed the offerings; but
retreated; knowing it was sacrilege to touch them. There, they must
decay, in honor of the god Ananna; for so this dead tree was
denominated by Mohi.

Now, as we were thus strolling about the Morai, the old chronicler
elucidating its mysteries, we suddenly spied Pani and the pilgrims
approaching the image of Doleema; his child leading the guide.

“This,” began Pani, pointing to the idol of stone, “is the holy god
Ananna who lives in the sap of this green and flourishing tree.”

“Thou meanest not, surely, this stone image we behold?” said Divino.

“I mean the tree,” said the guide. “It is no stone image.”

“Strange,” muttered the chief; “were it not a guide that spoke, I would
deny it. As it is, I hold my peace.”

“Mystery of mysteries!” cried the blind old pilgrim; “is it, then, a
stone image that Pani calls a tree? Oh, Oro, that I had eyes to see,
that I might verily behold it, and then believe it to be what it is
not; that so I might prove the largeness of my faith; and so merit the
blessing of Alma.”

“Thrice sacred Ananna,” murmured the sad-eyed maiden, falling upon her
knees before Doleema, “receive my adoration. Of thee, I know nothing,
but what the guide has spoken. I am but a poor, weak-minded maiden,
judging not for myself, but leaning upon others that are wiser. These
things are above me. I am afraid to think. In Alma’s name, receive my
homage.”

And she flung flowers before the god.

But Fauna, the hale matron, turning upon Pani, exclaimed, “Receive more
gifts, oh guide.” And again she showered them upon him.

Upon this, the willful boy who would not have Pani for his guide,
entered the Morai; and perceiving the group before the image, walked
rapidly to where they were. And beholding the idol, he regarded it
attentively, and said:—“This must be the image of Doleema; but I am not
sure.”

“Nay,” cried the blind pilgrim, “it is the holy tree Ananna, thou
wayward boy.”

“A tree? whatever it may be, it is not that; thou art blind, old man.”

“But though blind, I have that which thou lackest.”

Then said Pani, turning upon the boy, “Depart from the holy Morai, and
corrupt not the hearts of these pilgrims. Depart, I say; and, in the
sacred name of Alma, perish in thy endeavors to climb the Peak.”

“I may perish there in truth,” said the boy, with sadness; “but it
shall be in the path revealed to me in my dream. And think not, oh
guide, that I perfectly rely upon gaining that lofty summit. I will
climb high Ofo with hope, not faith; Oh, mighty Oro, help me!”

“Be not impious,” said Pani; “pronounce not Oro’s sacred name too
lightly.”

“Oro is but a sound,” said the boy. “They call the supreme god, Ati, in
my native isle; it is the soundless thought of him, oh guide, that is
in me.”

“Hark to his rhapsodies! Hark, how he prates of mysteries, that not
even Hivohitee can fathom.”

“Nor he, nor thou, nor I, nor any; Oro, to all, is Oro the unknown.”

“Why claim to know Oro, then, better than others?”

“I am not so vain; and I have little to substitute for what I can not
receive. I but feel Oro in me, yet can not declare the thought.”

“Proud boy! thy humility is a pretense; at heart, thou deemest thyself
wiser than Mardi.”

“Not near so wise. To believe is a haughty thing; my very doubts
humiliate me. I weep and doubt; all Mardi may be light; and I too
simple to discern.”

“He is mad,” said the chief Divino; “never before heard I such words.”

“They are thoughts,” muttered the guide.

“Poor fool!” cried Fauna.

“Lost youth!” sighed the maiden.

“He is but a child,” said the beggar. These whims will soon depart;
once I was like him; but, praise be to Alma, in the hour of sickness I
repented, feeble old man that I am!”

“It is because I am young and in health,” said the boy, “that I more
nourish the thoughts, that are born of my youth and my health. I am
fresh from my Maker, soul and body unwrinkled. On thy sick couch, old
man, they took thee at advantage.”

“Turn from the blasphemer,” cried Pani. “Hence! thou evil one, to the
perdition in store.”

“I will go my ways,” said the boy, “but Oro will shape the end.”

And he quitted the Morai.

After conducting the party round the sacred inclosure, assisting his
way with his staff, for his child had left him, Pani seated himself on
a low, mossy stone, grimly surrounded by idols; and directed the
pilgrims to return to his habitation; where, ere long he would rejoin
them.

The pilgrims departed, he remained in profound meditation; while,
backward and forward, an invisible ploughshare turned up the long
furrows on his brow.

Long he was silent; then muttered to himself, “That boy, that wild,
wise boy, has stabbed me to the heart. His thoughts are my suspicions.
But he is honest. Yet I harm none. Multitudes must have unspoken
meditations as well as I. Do we then mutually deceive? Off masks,
mankind, that I may know what warranty of fellowship with others, my
own thoughts possess. Why, upon this one theme, oh Oro! must all
dissemble? Our thoughts are not our own. Whate’er it be, an honest
thought must have some germ of truth. But we must set, as flows the
general stream; I blindly follow, where I seem to lead; the crowd of
pilgrims is so great, they see not there is none to guide.—It hinges
upon this: Have we angelic spirits? But in vain, in vain, oh Oro! I
essay to live out of this poor, blind body, fit dwelling for my
sightless soul. Death, death:—blind, am I dead? for blindness seems a
consciousness of death. Will my grave be more dark, than all is now?—
From dark to dark!—What is this subtle something that is in me, and
eludes me? Will it have no end? When, then, did it begin? All, all is
chaos! What is this shining light in heaven, this sun they tell me of?
Or, do they lie? Methinks, it might blaze convictions; but I brood and
grope in blackness; I am dumb with doubt; yet, ’tis not doubt, but
worse: I doubt my doubt. Oh, ye all-wise spirits in the air, how can ye
witness all this woe, and give no sign? Would, would that mine were a
settled doubt, like that wild boy’s, who without faith, seems full of
it. The undoubting doubter believes the most. Oh! that I were he.
Methinks that daring boy hath Alma in him, struggling to be free. But
those pilgrims: that trusting girl.—What, if they saw me as I am?
Peace, peace, my soul; on, mask, again.”

And he staggered from the Morai.




CHAPTER VI.
They Discourse Of The Gods Of Mardi, And Braid-Beard Tells Of One Foni


Walking from the sacred inclosure, Mohi discoursed of the plurality of
gods in the land, a subject suggested by the multitudinous idols we had
just been beholding.

Said Mohi, “These gods of wood and of stone are nothing in number to
the gods in the air. You breathe not a breath without inhaling, you
touch not a leaf without ruffling a spirit. There are gods of heaven,
and gods of earth; gods of sea and of land; gods of peace and of war;
gods of rook and of fell; gods of ghosts and of thieves; of singers and
dancers; of lean men and of house-thatchers. Gods glance in the eyes of
birds, and sparkle in the crests of the waves; gods merrily swing in
the boughs of the trees, and merrily sing in the brook. Gods are here,
and there, and every where; you are never alone for them.”

“If this be so, Braid-Beard,” said Babbalanja, “our inmost thoughts are
overheard; but not by eaves-droppers. However, my lord, these gods to
whom he alludes, merely belong to the semi-intelligibles, the divided
unities in unity, thin side of the First Adyta.”

“Indeed?” said Media.

“Semi-intelligible, say you, philosopher?” cried Mohi. “Then, prithee,
make it appear so; for what you say, seems gibberish to me.”

“Babbalanja,” said Media, “no more of your abstrusities; what know you
mortals of us gods and demi-gods? But tell me, Mohi, how many of your
deities of rock and fen think you there are? Have you no statistical
table?”

“My lord, at the lowest computation, there must be at least three
billion trillion of quintillions.”

“A mere unit!” said Babbalanja. “Old man, would you express an infinite
number? Then take the sum of the follies of Mardi for your
multiplicand; and for your multiplier, the totality of sublunarians,
that never have been heard of since they became no more; and the
product shall exceed your quintillions, even though all their units
were nonillions.”

“Have done, Babbalanja!” cried Media; “you are showing the sinister
vein in your marble. Have done. Take a warm bath, and make tepid your
cold blood. But come, Mohi, tell us of the ways of this Maramma;
something of the Morai and its idols, if you please.”

And straightway Braid-Beard proceeded with a narration, in substance as
follows:—

It seems, there was a particular family upon the island, whose members,
for many generations, had been set apart as sacrifices for the deity
called Doleema. They were marked by a sad and melancholy aspect, and a
certain involuntary shrinking, when passing the Morai. And, though,
when it came to the last, some of these unfortunates went joyfully to
their doom, declaring that they gloried to die in the service of holy
Doleema; still, were there others, who audaciously endeavored to shun
their fate; upon the approach of a festival, fleeing to the innermost
wilderness of the island. But little availed their flight. For swift on
their track sped the hereditary butler of the insulted god, one Xiki,
whose duty it was to provide the sacrifices. And when crouching in some
covert, the fugitive spied Xiki’s approach, so fearful did he become of
the vengeance of the deity he sought to evade, that renouncing all hope
of escape, he would burst from his lair, exclaiming, “Come on, and
kill!” baring his breast for the javelin that slew him.

The chronicles of Maramma were full of horrors.

In the wild heart of the island, was said still to lurk the remnant of
a band of warriors, who, in the days of the sire of the present
pontiff, had risen in arms to dethrone him, headed by Foni, an upstart
prophet, a personage distinguished for the uncommon beauty of his
person. With terrible carnage, these warriors had been defeated; and
the survivors, fleeing into the interior, for thirty days were pursued
by the victors. But though many were overtaken and speared, a number
survived; who, at last, wandering forlorn and in despair, like
demoniacs, ran wild in the woods. And the islanders, who at times
penetrated into the wilderness, for the purpose of procuring rare
herbs, often scared from their path some specter, glaring through the
foliage. Thrice had these demoniacs been discovered prowling about the
inhabited portions of the isle; and at day-break, an attendant of the
holy Morai once came upon a frightful figure, doubled with age, helping
itself to the offerings in the image of Doleema. The demoniac was
slain; and from his ineffaceable tatooing, it was proved that this was
no other than Foni, the false prophet; the splendid form he had carried
into the rebel fight, now squalid with age and misery.




CHAPTER VII.
They Visit The Lake Of Yammo


From the Morai, we bent our steps toward an unoccupied arbor; and here,
refreshing ourselves with the viands presented by Borabolla, we passed
the night. And next morning proceeded to voyage round to the opposite
quarter of the island; where, in the sacred lake of Yammo, stood the
famous temple of Oro, also the great gallery of the inferior deities.

The lake was but a portion of the smooth lagoon, made separate by an
arm of wooded reef, extending from the high western shore of the
island, and curving round toward a promontory, leaving a narrow channel
to the sea, almost invisible, however, from the land-locked interior.

In this lake were many islets, all green with groves. Its main-shore
was a steep acclivity, with jutting points, each crowned with mossy old
altars of stone, or ruinous temples, darkly reflected in the green,
glassy water; while, from its long line of stately trees, the low
reef-side of the lake looked one verdant bluff.

Gliding in upon Yammo, its many islets greeted us like a little Mardi;
but ever and anon we started at long lines of phantoms in the water,
reflections of the long line of images on the shore.

Toward the islet of Dolzono we first directed our way; and there we
beheld the great gallery of the gods; a mighty temple, resting on one
hundred tall pillars of palm, each based, below the surface, on the
buried body of a man; its nave one vista of idols; names carved on
their foreheads: Ogre, Tripoo, Indrimarvoki, Parzillo, Vivivi,
Jojijojorora, Jorkraki, and innumerable others.

Crowds of attendants were new-grouping the images.

“My lord, you behold one of their principal occupations,” said Mohi.

Said Media: “I have heard much of the famed image of Mujo, the Nursing
Mother;—can you point it out, Braid-Beard?”

“My lord, when last here, I saw Mujo at the head of this file; but they
must have removed it; I see it not now.”

“Do these attendants, then,” said Babbalanja, “so continually
new-marshal the idols, that visiting the gallery to-day, you are at a
loss to-morrow?”

“Even so,” said Braid-Beard. “But behold, my lord, this image is Mujo.”

We stood before an obelisk-idol, so towering, that gazing at it, we
were fain to throw back our heads. According to Mohi, winding stairs
led up through its legs; its abdomen a cellar, thick-stored with gourds
of old wine; its head, a hollow dome; in rude alto-relievo, its scores
of hillock-breasts were carved over with legions of baby deities,
frog-like sprawling; while, within, were secreted whole litters of
infant idols, there placed, to imbibe divinity from the knots of the
wood.

As we stood, a strange subterranean sound was heard, mingled with a
gurgling as of wine being poured. Looking up, we beheld, through
arrow-slits and port-holes, three masks, cross-legged seated in the
abdomen, and holding stout wassail. But instantly upon descrying us,
they vanished deeper into the interior; and presently was heard a
sepulchral chant, and many groans and grievous tribulations.

Passing on, we came to an image, with a long anaconda-like posterior
development, wound round and round its own neck.

“This must be Oloo, the god of Suicides,” said Babbalanja.

“Yes,” said Mohi, “you perceive, my lord, how he lays violent tail upon
himself.”

At length, the attendants having, in due order, new-deposed the long
lines of sphinxes and griffins, and many limbed images, a band of them,
in long flowing robes, began their morning chant.

“Awake Rarni! awake Foloona!
Awake unnumbered deities!”


With many similar invocations, to which the images made not the
slightest rejoinder. Not discouraged, however, the attendants now
separately proceeded to offer up petitions on behalf of various tribes,
retaining them for that purpose.

One prayed for abundance of rain, that the yams of Valapee might not
wilt in the ground; another for dry sunshine, as most favorable for the
present state of the Bread-fruit crop in Mondoldo.

Hearing all this, Babbalanja thus spoke:—“Doubtless, my lord Media,
besides these petitions we hear, there are ten thousand contradictory
prayers ascending to these idols. But methinks the gods will not jar
the eternal progression of things, by any hints from below; even were
it possible to satisfy conflicting desires.”

Said Yoomy, “But I would pray, nevertheless, Babbalanja; for prayer
draws us near to our own souls, and purifies our thoughts. Nor will I
grant that our supplications are altogether in vain.”

Still wandering among the images, Mohi had much to say, concerning
their respective claims to the reverence of the devout.

For though, in one way or other, all Mardians bowed to the supremacy of
Oro, they were not so unanimous concerning the inferior deities; those
supposed to be intermediately concerned in sublunary things. Some
nations sacrificed to one god; some to another; each maintaining, that
their own god was the most potential.

Observing that all the images were more or less defaced, Babbalanja
sought the reason.

To which, Braid-Beard made answer, that they had been thus defaced by
hostile devotees; who quarreling in the great gallery of the gods, and
getting beside themselves with rage, often sought to pull down, and
demolish each other’s favorite idols.

“But behold,” cried Babbalanja, “there seems not a single image
unmutilated. How is this, old man?”

“It is thus. While one faction defaces the images of its adversaries,
its own images are in like manner assailed; whence it comes that no
idol escapes.”

“No more, no more, Braid-Beard,” said Media. “Let us depart, and visit
the islet, where the god of all these gods is enshrined.”




CHAPTER VIII.
They Meet The Pilgrims At The Temple Of Oro


Deep, deep, in deep groves, we found the great temple of Oro,
Spreader-of-the-Sky, and deity supreme.

While here we silently stood eyeing this Mardi-renowned image, there
entered the fane a great multitude of its attendants, holding pearl-
shells on their heads, filled with a burning incense. And ranging
themselves in a crowd round Oro, they began a long-rolling chant, a sea
of sounds; and the thick smoke of their incense went up to the roof.

And now approached Pani and the pilgrims; followed, at a distance, by
the willful boy.

“Behold great Oro,” said the guide.

“We see naught but a cloud,” said the chief Divino.

“My ears are stunned by the chanting,” said the blind pilgrim.

“Receive more gifts, oh guide!” cried Fanna the matron. “Oh Oro!
invisible Oro! I kneel,” slow murmured the sad-eyed maid.

But now, a current of air swept aside the eddying incense; and the
willful boy, all eagerness to behold the image, went hither and
thither; but the gathering of attendants was great; and at last he
exclaimed, “Oh Oro! I can not see thee, for the crowd that stands
between thee and me.”

“Who is this babbler?” cried they with the censers, one and all turning
upon the pilgrims; “let him speak no more; but bow down, and grind the
dust where he stands; and declare himself the vilest creature that
crawls. So Oro and Alma command.”

“I feel nothing in me so utterly vile,” said the boy, “and I cringe to
none. But I would as lief _adore_ your image, as that in my heart, for
both mean the same; but more, how can I? I love great Oro, though I
comprehend him not. I marvel at his works, and feel as nothing in his
sight; but because he is thus omnipotent, and I a mortal, it follows
not that I am vile. Nor so doth he regard me. We do ourselves degrade
ourselves, not Oro us. Hath not Oro made me? And therefore am I not
worthy to stand erect before him? Oro is almighty, but no despot. I
wonder; I hope; I love; I weep; I have in me a feeling nigh to fear,
that is not fear; but wholly vile I am not; nor can we love and cringe.
But Oro knows my heart, which I can not speak.”

“Impious boy,” cried they with the censers, “we will offer thee up,
before the very image thou contemnest. In the name of Alma, seize him.”

And they bore him away unresisting.

“Thus perish the ungodly,” said Pani to the shuddering pilgrims.

And they quitted the temple, to journey toward the Peak of Ofo.

“My soul bursts!” cried Yoomy. “My lord, my lord, let us save the boy.”

“Speak not,” said Media. “His fate is fixed. Let Mardi stand.”

“Then let us away from hence, my lord; and join the pilgrims; for, in
these inland vales, the lost one may be found, perhaps at the very base
of Ofo.”

“Not there; not there;” cried Babbalanja, “Yillah may have touched
these shores; but long since she must have fled.”




CHAPTER IX.
They Discourse Of Alma


Sailing to and fro in the lake, to view its scenery, much discourse
took place concerning the things we had seen; and far removed from the
censer-bearers, the sad fate that awaited the boy was now the theme of
all.

A good deal was then said of Alma, to whom the guide, the pilgrims, and
the censer-bearers had frequently alluded, as to some paramount
authority.

Called upon to reveal what his chronicles said on this theme,
Braid-Beard complied; at great length narrating, what now follows
condensed.

Alma, it seems, was an illustrious prophet, and teacher divine; who,
ages ago, at long intervals, and in various islands, had appeared to
the Mardians under the different titles of Brami, Manko, and Alma. Many
thousands of moons had elasped since his last and most memorable
avatar, as Alma on the isle of Maramma. Each of his advents had taken
place in a comparatively dark and benighted age. Hence, it was devoutly
believed, that he came to redeem the Mardians from their heathenish
thrall; to instruct them in the ways of truth, virtue, and happiness;
to allure them to good by promises of beatitude hereafter; and to
restrain them from evil by denunciations of woe. Separated from the
impurities and corruptions, which in a long series of centuries had
become attached to every thing originally uttered by the prophet, the
maxims, which as Brami he had taught, seemed similar to those
inculcated by Manko. But as Alma, adapting his lessons to the improved
condition of humanity, the divine prophet had more completely unfolded
his scheme; as Alma, he had made his last revelation.

This narration concluded, Babbalanja mildly observed, “Mohi: without
seeking to accuse you of uttering falsehoods; since what you relate
rests not upon testimony of your own; permit me, to question the
fidelity of your account of Alma. The prophet came to dissipate errors,
you say; but superadded to many that have survived the past, ten
thousand others have originated in various constructions of the
principles of Alma himself. The prophet came to do away all gods but
one; but since the days of Alma, the idols of Maramma have more than
quadrupled. The prophet came to make us Mardians more virtuous and
happy; but along with all previous good, the same wars, crimes, and
miseries, which existed in Alma’s day, under various modifications are
yet extant. Nay: take from your chronicles, Mohi, the history of those
horrors, one way or other, resulting from the doings of Alma’s nominal
followers, and your chronicles would not so frequently make mention of
blood. The prophet came to guarantee our eternal felicity; but
according to what is held in Maramma, that felicity rests on so hard a
proviso, that to a thinking mind, but very few of our sinful race may
secure it. For one, then, I wholly reject your Alma; not so much,
because of all that is hard to be understood in his histories; as
because of obvious and undeniable things all round us; which, to me,
seem at war with an unreserved faith in his doctrines as promulgated
here in Maramma. Besides; every thing in this isle strengthens my
incredulity; I never was so thorough a disbeliever as now.”

“Let the winds be laid,” cried Mohi, “while your rash confession is
being made in this sacred lake.”

Said Media, “Philosopher; remember the boy, and they that seized him.”

“Ah! I do indeed remember him. Poor youth! in his agony, how my heart
yearned toward his. But that very prudence which you deny me, my lord,
prevented me from saying aught in his behalf. Have you not observed,
that until now, when we are completely by ourselves, I have refrained
from freely discoursing of what we have seen in this island? Trust me,
my lord, there is no man, that bears more in mind the necessity of
being either a believer or a hypocrite in Maramma, and the imminent
peril of being honest here, than I, Babbalanja. And have I not reason
to be wary, when in my boyhood, my own sire was burnt for his temerity;
and in this very isle? Just Oro! it was done in the name of Alma,—what
wonder then, that, at times, I almost hate that sound. And from those
flames, they devoutly swore he went to others,—horrible fable!”

Said Mohi: “Do you deny, then, the everlasting torments?”

“’Tis not worth a denial. Nor by formally denying it, will I run the
risk of shaking the faith of, thousands, who in that pious belief find
infinite consolation for all they suffer in Mardi.”

“How?” said Media; “are there those who soothe themselves with the
thought of everlasting flames?”

“One would think so, my lord, since they defend that dogma more
resolutely than any other. Sooner will they yield you the isles of
Paradise, than it. And in truth, as liege followers of Alma, they would
seem but right in clinging to it as they do; for, according to all one
hears in Maramma, the great end of the prophet’s mission seems to have
been the revealing to us Mardians the existence of horrors, most hard
to escape. But better we were all annihilated, than that one man should
be damned.”

Rejoined Media: “But think you not, that possibly, Alma may have been
misconceived? Are you certain that doctrine is his?”

“I know nothing more than that such is the belief in this land. And in
these matters, I know not where else to go for information. But, my
lord, had I been living in those days when certain men are said to have
been actually possessed by spirits from hell, I had not let slip the
opportunity—as our forefathers did—to cross-question them concerning
the place they came from.”

“Well, well,” said Media, “your Alma’s faith concerns not me: I am a
king, and a demi-god; and leave vulgar torments to the commonality.”

“But it concerns me,” muttered Mohi; “yet I know not what to think.”

“For me,” said Yoomy, “I reject it. Could I, I would not believe it. It
is at variance with the dictates of my heart instinctively my heart
turns from it, as a thirsty man from gall.”

“Hush; say no more,” said Mohi; “again we approach the shore.”




CHAPTER X.
Mohi Tells Of One Ravoo, And They Land To Visit Hevaneva, A Flourishing
Artisan


Having seen all worth viewing in Yammo, we departed, to complete the
circumnavigation of the island, by returning to Uma without reversing
our prows. As we glided along, we passed many objects of interest,
concerning which, Mohi, as usual, was very diffuse.

Among other things pointed out, were certain little altars, like mile-
stones, planted here and there upon bright bluffs, running out into the
lagoon. Dedicated respectively to the guardian spirits of Maramma,
these altars formed a chain of spiritual defenses; and here were
presumed to stand post the most vigilant of warders; dread Hivohitee,
all by himself, garrisoning the impregnable interior.

But these sentries were only subalterns, subject to the beck of the
Pontiff; who frequently sent word to them, concerning the duties of
their watch. His mandates were intrusted to one Ravoo, the hereditary
pontifical messenger; a long-limbed varlet, so swift of foot, that he
was said to travel like a javelin. “Art thou Ravoo, that thou so pliest
thy legs?” say these islanders, to one encountered in a hurry.

Hivohitee’s postman held no oral communication with the sentries.
Dispatched round the island with divers bits of tappa, hieroglyphically
stamped, he merely deposited one upon each altar; superadding a stone,
to keep the missive in its place; and so went his rounds.

Now, his route lay over hill and over dale, and over many a coral rock;
and to preserve his feet from bruises, he was fain to wear a sort of
buskin, or boot, fabricated of a durable tappa, made from the thickest
and toughest of fibers. As he never wore his buskins except when he
carried the mail, Ravoo sorely fretted with his Hessians; though it
would have been highly imprudent to travel without them. To make the
thing more endurable, therefore, and, at intervals, to cool his heated
pedals, he established a series of stopping-places, or stages; at each
of which a fresh pair of buskins, hanging from a tree, were taken down
and vaulted into by the ingenious traveler. Those relays of boots were
exceedingly convenient; next, indeed, to being lifted upon a fresh pair
of legs.

“Now, to what purpose that anecdote?” demanded Babbalanja of Mohi, who
in substance related it.

“Marry! ’tis but the simple recital of a fact; and I tell it to
entertain the company.”

“But has it any meaning you know of?”

“Thou art wise, find out,” retorted Braid-Beard. “But what comes of
it?” persisted Babbalanja.

“Beshrew me, this senseless catechising of thine,” replied Mohi;
“naught else, it seems, save a grin or two.”

“And pray, what may you be driving at, philosopher?” interrupted Media.

“I am intent upon the essence of things; the mystery that lieth beyond;
the elements of the tear which much laughter provoketh; that which is
beneath the seeming; the precious pearl within the shaggy oyster. I
probe the circle’s center; I seek to evolve the inscrutable.”

“Seek on; and when aught is found, cry out, that we may run to see.”

“My lord the king is merry upon me. To him my more subtle cogitations
seem foolishness. But believe me, my lord, there is more to be thought
of than to be seen. There is a world of wonders insphered within the
spontaneous consciousness; or, as old Bardianna hath it, a mystery
within the obvious, yet an obviousness within the mystery.”

“And did I ever deny that?” said Media.

“As plain as my hand in the dark,” said Mohi.

“I dreamed a dream,” said Yoomy.

“They banter me; but enough; I am to blame for discoursing upon the
deep world wherein I live. I am wrong in seeking to invest sublunary
sounds with celestial sense. Much that is in me is incommunicable by
this ether we breathe. But I blame ye not.” And wrapping round him his
mantle, Babbalanja retired into its most private folds.

Ere coming in sight of Uma, we put into a little bay, to pay our
respects to Hevaneva, a famous character there dwelling; who, assisted
by many journeymen, carried on the lucrative business of making idols
for the surrounding isles.

Know ye, that all idols not made in Maramma, and consecrated by
Hivohitee; and, what is more, in strings of teeth paid down for to
Hevaneva; are of no more account, than logs, stocks, or stones. Yet
does not the cunning artificer monopolize the profits of his vocation;
for Hevaneva being but the vassal of the Pontiff, the latter lays claim
to King Leo’s share of the spoils, and secures it.

The place was very prettily lapped in a pleasant dell, nigh to the
margin of the water; and here, were several spacious arbors; wherein,
prostrate upon their sacred faces, were all manner of idols, in every
imaginable stage of statuary development.

With wonderful industry the journeymen were plying their tools;—some
chiseling noses; some trenching for mouths; and others, with heated
flints, boring for ears: a hole drilled straight through the occiput,
representing the auricular organs.

“How easily they are seen through,” said Babbalanja, taking a sight
through one of the heads.

The last finish is given to their godships, by rubbing them all over
with dried slips of consecrated shark-skin, rough as sand paper, tacked
over bits of wood.

In one of the farther arbors, Hevaneva pointed out a goodly array of
idols, all complete and ready for the market. They were of every
variety of pattern; and of every size; from that of a giant, to the
little images worn in the ears of the ultra devout.

“Of late,” said the artist, “there has been a lively demand for the
image of Arbino the god of fishing; the present being the principal
season for that business. For Nadams (Nadam presides over love and
wine), there has also been urgent call; it being the time of the grape;
and the maidens growing frolicsome withal, and devotional.”

Seeing that Hevaneva handled his wares with much familiarity, not to
say irreverence, Babbalanja was minded to learn from him, what he
thought of his trade; whether the images he made were genuine or
spurious; in a word, whether he believed in his gods.

His reply was curious. But still more so, the marginal gestures
wherewith he helped out the text.

“When I cut down the trees for my idols,” said he, “they are nothing
but logs; when upon those logs, I chalk out the figures of, my images,
they yet remain logs; when the chisel is applied, logs they are still;
and when all complete, I at last stand them up in my studio, even then
they are logs. Nevertheless, when I handle the pay, they are as prime
gods, as ever were turned out in Maramma.”

“You must make a very great variety,” said Babbalanja.

“All sorts, all sorts.”

“And from the same material, I presume.”

“Ay, ay, one grove supplies them all. And, on an average, each tree
stands us in full fifty idols. Then, we often take second-hand images
in part pay for new ones. These we work over again into new patterns;
touching up their eyes and ears; resetting their noses; and more
especially new-footing their legs, where they always decay first.”

Under sanction of the Pontiff, Hevaneva, in addition to his large
commerce in idols, also carried on the highly lucrative business of
canoe-building; the profits whereof, undivided, he dropped into his
private exchequer. But Mohi averred, that the Pontiff often charged him
with neglecting his images, for his canoes. Be that as it may, Hevaneva
drove a thriving trade at both avocations. And in demonstration of the
fact, he directed our attention to three long rows of canoes, upheld by
wooden supports. They were in perfect order; at a moment’s notice,
ready for launching; being furnished with paddles, out-riggers, masts,
sails, and a human skull, with a short handle thrust through one of its
eyes, the ordinary bailer of Maramma; besides other appurtenances,
including on the prow a duodecimo idol to match.

Owing to a superstitious preference bestowed upon the wood and work of
the sacred island, Hevaneva’s canoes were in as high repute as his
idols; and sold equally well.

In truth, in several ways one trade helped the other. The larger images
being dug out of the hollow part of the canoes; and all knotty odds and
ends reserved for the idol ear-rings.

“But after all,” said the artificer, “I find a readier sale for my
images, than for my canoes.”

“And so it will ever be,” said Babbalanja.—“Stick to thy idols, man! a
trade, more reliable than the baker’s.”




CHAPTER XI.
A Nursery-Tale Of Babbalanja’s


Having taken to our canoes once again, we were silently sailing along,
when Media observed, “Babbalanja; though I seldom trouble myself with
such thoughts, I have just been thinking, how difficult it must be, for
the more ignorant sort of people, to decide upon what particular image
to worship as a guardian deity, when in Maramma, it seems, there exists
such a multitude of idols, and a thousand more are to be heard of.”

“Not at all, your highness. The more ignorant the better. The multitude
of images distracts them not. But I am in no mood for serious
discourse; let me tell you a story.”

“A story! hear him: the solemn philosopher is desirous of regaling us
with a tale! But pray, begin.”

“Once upon a time, then,” said Babbalanja, indifferently adjusting his
girdle, “nine blind men, with uncommonly long noses, set out on their
travels to see the great island on which they were born.”

“A precious beginning,” muttered Mohi. “Nine blind men setting out to
see sights.”

Continued Babbalanja, “Staff in hand, they traveled; one in advance of
the other; each man with his palm upon the shoulder next him; and he
with the longest nose took the lead of the file. Journeying on in this
manner, they came to a valley, in which reigned a king called Tammaro.
Now, in a certain inclosure toward the head of the valley, there stood
an immense wild banian tree; all over moss, and many centuries old, and
forming quite a wood in itself: its thousand boughs striking into the
earth, and fixing there as many gigantic trunks. With Tammaro, it had
long been a question, which of those many trunks was the original and
true one; a matter that had puzzled the wisest heads among his
subjects; and in vain had a reward been offered for the solution of the
perplexity. But the tree was so vast, and its fabric so complex; and
its rooted branches so similar in appearance; and so numerous, from the
circumstance that every year had added to them, that it was quite
impossible to determine the point. Nevertheless, no sooner did the nine
blind men hear that there was a reward offered for discovering the
trunk of a tree, standing all by itself, than, one and all, they
assured Tammaro, that they would quickly settle that little difficulty
of his; and loudly inveighed against the stupidity of his sages, who
had been so easily posed. So, being conducted into the inclosure, and
assured that the tree was somewhere within, they separated their
forces, so as at wide intervals to surround it at a distance; when
feeling their way, with their staves and their noses, they advanced to
the search, crying out—‘Pshaw! make room there; let us wise men feel of
the mystery.’ Presently, striking with his nose one of the rooted
branches, the foremost blind man quickly knelt down; and feeling that
it struck into the earth, gleefully shouted: Here it is! here it is!’
But almost in the same breath, his companions, also, each striking a
branch with his staff or his nose, cried out in like manner, ‘Here it
is! here it is!’ Whereupon they were all confounded: but directly, the
man who first cried out, thus addressed the rest: Good friends, surely
you’re mistaken. There is but one tree in the place, and here it is.’
‘Very true,’ said the others, ‘all together; there is only _one_ tree;
but _here_ it is.’ ‘Nay,’ said the others, ‘it is _here!_’ and so
saying, each blind man triumphantly felt of the branch, where it
penetrated into the earth. Then again said the first speaker: Good
friends, if you will not believe what I say, come hither, and feel for
yourselves.’ ‘Nay, nay,’ replied they, why seek further? _here_ it is;
and nowhere else can it be.’ ‘You blind fools, you, you contradict
yourselves,’ continued the first speaker, waxing wroth; ‘how can you
each have hold of a separate trunk, when there is but one in the
place?’ Whereupon, they redoubled their cries, calling each other all
manner of opprobrious names, and presently they fell to beating each
other with their staves, and charging upon each other with their noses.
But soon after, being loudly called upon by Tammaro and his people; who
all this while had been looking on; being loudly called upon, I say, to
clap their hands on the trunk, they again rushed for their respective
branches; and it so happened, that, one and all, they changed places;
but still cried out, ‘_Here_ it is; _here_ it is!’ ‘Peace! peace! ye
silly blind men,’ said Tammaro. ‘Will ye without eyes presume to see
more sharply than those who have them? The tree is too much for us all.
Hence! depart from the valley.’”

“An admirable story,” cried Media. “I had no idea that a mere mortal,
least of all a philosopher, could acquit himself so well. By my
scepter, but it is well done! Ha, ha! blind men round a banian! Why,
Babbalanja, no demi-god could surpass it. Taji, could you?”

“But, Babbalanja, what under the sun, mean you by your blind story!”
cried Mohi. “Obverse, or reverse, I can make nothing out of it.”

“Others may,” said Babbalanja. “It is a polysensuum, old man.”

“A pollywog!” said Mohi.




CHAPTER XII.
Landing To Visit Hivohitee The Pontiff, They Encounter An Extraordinary
Old Hermit; With Whom Yoomy Has A Confidential Interview, But Learns
Little


Gliding on, suddenly we spied a solitary Islander putting out in his
canoe from a neighboring cove.

Drawing near, the stranger informed us, that he was just from the face
of the great Pontiff, Hivohitee, who, having dismissed his celestial
guests, had retired to his private sanctuary. Upon this, Media resolved
to land forthwith, and under the guidance of Mohi, proceed inland, and
pay a visit to his Holiness.

Quitting the beach, our path penetrated into the solitudes of the
groves. Skirting the way were tall Casaurinas, a species of cypress,
standing motionless in the shadows, as files of mutes at a funeral. But
here and there, they were overrun with the adventurous vines of the
Convolvulus, the Morning-glory of the Tropics, whose tendrils, bruised
by the twigs, dropped milk upon the dragon-like scales of the trees.

This vine is of many varieties. Lying perdu, and shunning the garish
sun through the day, one species rises at night with the stars;
bursting forth in dazzling constellations of blossoms, which close at
dawn. Others, slumbering through the darkness, are up and abroad with
their petals, by peep of morn; and after inhaling its breath, again
drop their lids in repose. While a third species, more capricious,
refuse to expand at all, unless in the most brilliant sunshine, and
upon the very tops of the loftiest trees. Ambitious flowers! that will
not blow, unless in high places, with the bright day looking on and
admiring.

Here and there, we passed open glades in the woods, delicious with the
incense of violets. Balsamic ferns, stirred by the breeze, fanned all
the air with aromas. These glades were delightful.

Journeying on, we at length came to a dark glen so deftly hidden by the
surrounding copses, that were it not for the miasma thence wafted, an
ignorant wayfarer might pass and repass it, time and again, never
dreaming of its vicinity.

Down into the gloom of this glen we descended. Its sides were mantled
with noxious shrubs, whose exhalations, half way down, unpleasantly
blended with the piny breeze from the uplands. Through its bed ran a
brook, whose incrusted margin had a strange metallic luster, from the
polluted waters here flowing; their source a sulphur spring, of vile
flavor and odor, where many invalid pilgrims resorted.

The woods all round were haunted by the dismal cawings of crows; tap,
tap, the black hawk whetted his bill on the boughs; each trunk stalked
a ghost; and from those trunks, Hevaneva procured the wood for his
idols.

Rapidly crossing this place, Yoomy’s hands to his ears, old Mohi’s to
his nostrils, and Babbalanja vainly trying to walk with closed eyes, we
toiled among steep, flinty rocks, along a wild, zigzag pathway; like a
mule-track in the Andes, not so much onward as upward; Yoomy above
Babbalanja, my lord Media above him, and Braid-Beard, our guide, in the
air, above all.

Strown over with cinders, the vitreous marl seemed tumbled together, as
if belched from a volcano’s throat.

Presently, we came to a tall, slender structure, hidden among the
scenic projections of the cliffs, like a monument in the dark, vaulted
ways of an abbey. Surrounding it, were five extinct craters. The air
was sultry and still, as if full of spent thunderbolts.

Like a Hindoo pagoda, this bamboo edifice rose story above story; its
many angles and points decorated with pearl-shells suspended by cords.
But the uppermost story, some ten toises in the air, was closely
thatched from apex to floor; which summit was gained by a series of
ascents.

What eremite dwelleth here, like St. Stylites at the top of his
column?—a question which Mohi seemed all eagerness to have answered.

Dropping upon his knees, he gave a peculiar low call: no response.
Another: all was silent. Marching up to the pagoda, and again dropping
upon his knees, he shook the bamboos till the edifice rocked, and its
pearl-shells jingled, as if a troop of Andalusian mules, with bells
round their necks, were galloping along the defile.

At length the thatch aloft was thrown open, and a head was thrust
forth. It was that of an old, old man; with steel-gray eyes, hair and
beard, and a horrible necklace of jaw-bones.

Now, issuing from the pagoda, Mohi turned about to gain a view of the
ghost he had raised; and no sooner did he behold it, than with King
Media and the rest, he made a marked salutation.

Presently, the eremite pointed to where Yoomy was standing; and waved
his hand upward; when Mohi informed the minstrel, that it was St.
Stylites’ pleasure, that he should pay him a visit.

Wondering what was to come, Yoomy proceeded to mount; and at last
arriving toward the top of the pagoda, was met by an opening, from
which an encouraging arm assisted him to gain the ultimate landing.

Here, all was murky enough; for the aperture from which the head of the
apparition had been thrust, was now closed; and what little twilight
there was, came up through the opening in the floor.

In this dismal seclusion, silently the hermit confronted the minstrel;
his gray hair, eyes, and beard all gleaming, as if streaked with
phosphorus; while his ghastly gorget grinned hideously, with all its
jaws.

Mutely Yoomy waited to be addressed; but hearing no sound, and becoming
alive to the strangeness of his situation, he meditated whether it
would not be well to subside out of sight, even as he had come—through
the floor. An intention which the eremite must have anticipated; for of
a sudden, something was slid over the opening; and the apparition
seating itself thereupon, the twain were in darkness complete.

Shut up thus, with an inscrutable stranger posted at the only aperture
of escape, poor Yoomy fell into something like a panic; hardly knowing
what step to take next. As for endeavoring to force his way out, it was
alarming to think of; for aught he knew, the eremite, availing himself
of the gloom, might be bristling all over with javelin points.

At last, the silence was broken.

“What see you, mortal?”

“Chiefly darkness,” said Yoomy, wondering at the audacity of the
question.

“I dwell in it. But what else see you, mortal?”

“The dim gleaming of thy gorget.”

“But that is not me. What else dost thou see?”

“Nothing.”

“Then thou hast found me out, and seen all! Descend.”

And with that, the passage-way opened, and groping through the
twilight, Yoomy obeyed the mandate, and retreated; full of vexation at
his enigmatical reception.

On his alighting, Mohi inquired whether the hermit was not a wonderful
personage.

But thinking some sage waggery lurked in the question; and at present
too indignant to enter into details, the minstrel made some impatient
reply; and winding through a defile, the party resumed its journey.

Straggling behind, to survey the strange plants and flowers in his
path, Yoomy became so absorbed, as almost to forget the scene in the
pagoda; yet every moment expected to be nearing the stately abode of
the Pontiff.

But suddenly, the scene around grew familiar; the path seemed that
which had been followed just after leaving the canoes; and at length,
the place of debarkation was in sight.

Surprised that the object of our visit should have been thus abandoned,
the minstrel ran forward, and sought an explanation.

Whereupon, Mohi lifted his hands in amazement; exclaiming at the
blindness of the eyes, which had beheld the supreme Pontiff of Maramma,
without knowing it.

The old hermit was no other than the dread Hivohitee; the pagoda, the
inmost oracle of the isle.




CHAPTER XIII.
Babbalanja Endeavors To Explain The Mystery


This Great Mogul of a personage, then; this woundy Aliasuerus; this man
of men; this same Hivohitee, whose name rumbled among the mountains
like a peal of thunder, had been seen face to face, and taken for
naught, but a bearded old hermit, or at best, some equivocal conjuror.

So great was his wonderment at the time, that Yoomy could not avoid
expressing it in words.

Whereupon thus discoursed Babbalanja:

“Gentle Yoomy, be not astounded, that Hivohitee is so far behind your
previous conceptions. The shadows of things are greater than
themselves; and the more exaggerated the shadow, the more unlike to the
substance.”

“But knowing now, what manner of person Hivohitee is,” said Yoomy,
“much do I long to behold him again.”

But Mohi assured him it was out of the question; that the Pontiff
always acted toward strangers as toward him (Yoomy); and that but one
dim blink at the eremite was all that mortal could obtain.

Debarred thus from a second and more satisfactory interview with one,
concerning whom his curiosity had been violently aroused, the minstrel
again turned to Mohi for enlightenment; especially touching that
magnate’s Egyptian reception of him in his aerial den.

Whereto, the chronicler made answer, that the Pontiff affected darkness
because he liked it: that he was a ruler of few words, but many deeds;
and that, had Yoomy been permitted to tarry longer with him in the
pagoda, he would have been privy to many strange attestations of the
divinity imputed to him. Voices would have been heard in the air,
gossiping with Hivohitee; noises inexplicable proceeding from him; in
brief, light would have flashed out of his darkness.

“But who has seen these things, Mohi?” said Babbalanja, “have you?”

“Nay.”

“Who then?—Media?—Any one you know?”

“Nay: but the whole Archipelago has.”

“Thus,” exclaimed Babbalanja, “does Mardi, blind though it be in many
things, collectively behold the marvels, which one pair of eyes sees
not.”




CHAPTER XIV.
Taji Receives Tidings And Omens


Slowly sailing on, we were overtaken by a shallop; whose inmates
grappling to the side of Media’s, said they came from Borabolla.

Dismal tidings!—My faithful follower’s death.

Absent over night, that morning early, he had been discovered lifeless
in the woods, three arrows in his heart. And the three pale strangers
were nowhere to be found. But a fleet canoe was missing from the beach.

Slain for me! my soul sobbed out. Nor yet appeased Aleema’s manes; nor
yet seemed sated the avengers’ malice; who, doubtless, were on my
track.

But I turned; and instantly the three canoes had been reversed; and
full soon, Jarl’s dead hand in mine, had not Media interposed.

“To death, your presence will not bring life back.”

“And we must on,” said Babbalanja. “We seek the living, not the dead.”

Thus they overruled me; and Borabolla’s messengers departed.

Soon evening came, and in its shades, three shadows,—Hautia’s heralds.

Their shallop glided near.

A leaf tri-foiled was first presented; then another, arrow-shaped.

Said Yoomy, “Still I swiftly follow, behind revenge.”

Then were showered faded, pallid daffodils.

Said Yoomy, “Thy hopes are blighted all.”

“Not dead, but living with the life of life. Sirens! I heed ye not.”

They would have showered more flowers; but crowding sail we left them.

Much converse followed. Then, beneath the canopy all sought repose. And
ere long slouched sleep drew nigh, tending dreams innumerable; silent
dotting all the downs a shepherd with his flock.




CHAPTER XV.
Dreams


Dreams! dreams! golden dreams: endless, and golden, as the flowery
prairies, that stretch away from the Rio Sacramento, in whose waters
Danae’s shower was woven;—prairies like rounded eternities: jonquil
leaves beaten out; and my dreams herd like buffaloes, browsing on to
the horizon, and browsing on round the world; and among them, I dash
with my lance, to spear one, ere they all flee.

Dreams! dreams! passing and repassing, like Oriental empires in
history; and scepters wave thick, as Bruce’s pikes at Bannockburn; and
crowns are plenty as marigolds in June. And far in the background, hazy
and blue, their steeps let down from the sky, loom Andes on Andes,
rooted on Alps; and all round me, long rushing oceans, roll Amazons and
Oronocos; waves, mounted Parthians; and, to and fro, toss the wide
woodlands: all the world an elk, and the forests its antlers.

But far to the South, past my Sicily suns and my vineyards, stretches
the Antarctic barrier of ice: a China wall, built up from the sea, and
nodding its frosted towers in the dun, clouded sky. Do Tartary and
Siberia lie beyond? Deathful, desolate dominions those; bleak and wild
the ocean, beating at that barrier’s base, hovering ’twixt freezing and
foaming; and freighted with navies of ice-bergs,—warring worlds
crossing orbits; their long icicles, projecting like spears to the
charge. Wide away stream the floes of drift ice, frozen cemeteries of
skeletons and bones. White bears howl as they drift from their cubs;
and the grinding islands crush the skulls of the peering seals.

But beneath me, at the Equator, the earth pulses and beats like a
warrior’s heart; till I know not, whether it be not myself. And my soul
sinks down to the depths, and soars to the skies; and comet-like reels
on through such boundless expanses, that methinks all the worlds are my
kin, and I invoke them to stay in their course. Yet, like a mighty
three-decker, towing argosies by scores, I tremble, gasp, and strain in
my flight, and fain would cast off the cables that hamper.

And like a frigate, I am full with a thousand souls; and as on, on, on,
I scud before the wind, many mariners rush up from the orlop below,
like miners from caves; running shouting across my decks; opposite
braces are pulled; and this way and that, the great yards swing round
on their axes; and boisterous speaking-trumpets are heard; and
contending orders, to save the good ship from the shoals. Shoals, like
nebulous vapors, shoreing the white reef of the Milky Way, against
which the wrecked worlds are dashed; strewing all the strand, with
their Himmaleh keels and ribs.

Ay: many, many souls are in me. In my tropical calms, when my ship lies
tranced on Eternity’s main, speaking one at a time, then all with one
voice: an orchestra of many French bugles and horns, rising, and
falling, and swaying, in golden calls and responses.

Sometimes, when these Atlantics and Pacifics thus undulate round me, I
lie stretched out in their midst: a land-locked Mediterranean, knowing
no ebb, nor flow. Then again, I am dashed in the spray of these sounds:
an eagle at the world’s end, tossed skyward, on the horns of the
tempest.

Yet, again, I descend, and list to the concert.

Like a grand, ground swell, Homer’s old organ rolls its vast volumes
under the light frothy wave-crests of Anacreon and Hafiz; and high over
my ocean, sweet Shakespeare soars, like all the larks of the spring.
Throned on my seaside, like Canute, bearded Ossian smites his hoar
harp, wreathed with wild-flowers, in which warble my Wallers; blind
Milton sings bass to my Petrarchs and Priors, and laureate crown me
with bays.

In me, many worthies recline, and converse. I list to St. Paul who
argues the doubts of Montaigne; Julian the Apostate cross-questions
Augustine; and Thomas-a-Kempis unrolls his old black letters for all to
decipher. Zeno murmurs maxims beneath the hoarse shout of Democritus;
and though Democritus laugh loud and long, and the sneer of Pyrrho be
seen; yet, divine Plato, and Proclus, and, Verulam are of my counsel;
and Zoroaster whispered me before I was born. I walk a world that is
mine; and enter many nations, as Mingo Park rested in African cots; I
am served like Bajazet: Bacchus my butler, Virgil my minstrel, Philip
Sidney my page. My memory is a life beyond birth; my memory, my library
of the Vatican, its alcoves all endless perspectives, eve-tinted by
cross-lights from Middle-Age oriels.

And as the great Mississippi musters his watery nations: Ohio, with all
his leagued streams; Missouri, bringing down in torrents the clans from
the highlands; Arkansas, his Tartar rivers from the plain;—so, with all
the past and present pouring in me, I roll down my billow from afar.

Yet not I, but another: God is my Lord; and though many satellites
revolve around me, I and all mine revolve round the great central
Truth, sun-like, fixed and luminous forever in the foundationless
firmament.

Fire flames on my tongue; and though of old the Bactrian prophets were
stoned, yet the stoners in oblivion sleep. But whoso stones me, shall
be as Erostratus, who put torch to the temple; though Genghis Khan with
Cambyses combine to obliterate him, his name shall be extant in the
mouth of the last man that lives. And if so be, down unto death, whence
I came, will I go, like Xenophon retreating on Greece, all Persia
brandishing her spears in his rear.

My cheek blanches white while I write; I start at the scratch of my
pen; my own mad brood of eagles devours me; fain would I unsay this
audacity; but an iron-mailed hand clenches mine in a vice, and prints
down every letter in my spite. Fain would I hurl off this Dionysius
that rides me; my thoughts crush me down till I groan; in far fields I
hear the song of the reaper, while I slave and faint in this cell. The
fever runs through me like lava; my hot brain burns like a coal; and
like many a monarch, I am less to be envied, than the veriest hind in
the land.




CHAPTER XVI.
Media And Babbalanja Discourse


Our visiting the Pontiff at a time previously unforeseen, somewhat
altered our plans. All search in Maramma for the lost one proving
fruitless, and nothing of note remaining to be seen, we returned not to
Uma; but proceeded with the tour of the lagoon.

When day came, reclining beneath the canopy, Babbalanja would fain have
seriously discussed those things we had lately been seeing, which, for
all the occasional levity he had recently evinced, seemed very near his
heart.

But my lord Media forbade; saying that they necessarily included a
topic which all gay, sensible Mardians, who desired to live and be
merry, invariably banished from social discourse.

“Meditate as much as you will, Babbalanja, but say little aloud, unless
in a merry and mythical way. Lay down the great maxims of things, but
let inferences take care of themselves. Never be special; never, a
partisan. In safety, afar off, you may batter down a fortress; but at
your peril you essay to carry a single turret by escalade. And if
doubts distract you, in vain will you seek sympathy from your fellow
men. For upon this one theme, not a few of you free-minded mortals,
even the otherwise honest and intelligent, are the least frank and
friendly. Discourse with them, and it is mostly formulas, or
prevarications, or hollow assumption of philosophical indifference, or
urbane hypocrisies, or a cool, civil deference to the dominant belief;
or still worse, but less common, a brutality of indiscriminate
skepticism. Furthermore, Babbalanja, on this head, final, last thoughts
you mortals have none; nor can have; and, at bottom, your own fleeting
fancies are too often secrets to yourselves; and sooner may you get
another’s secret, than your own. Thus with the wisest of you all; you
are ever unfixed. Do you show a tropical calm without? then, be sure a
thousand contrary currents whirl and eddy within. The free, airy robe
of your philosophy is but a dream, which seems true while it lasts; but
waking again into the orthodox world, straightway you resume the old
habit. And though in your dreams you may hie to the uttermost Orient,
yet all the while you abide where you are. Babbalanja, you mortals
dwell in Mardi, and it is impossible to get elsewhere.”

Said Babbalanja, “My lord, you school me. But though I dissent from
some of your positions, I am willing to confess, that this is not the
first time a philosopher has been instructed by a man.”

“A demi-god, sir; and therefore I the more readily discharge my mind of
all seriousness, touching the subject, with which you mortals so vex
and torment yourselves.”

Silence ensued. And seated apart, on both sides of the barge, solemnly
swaying, in fixed meditation, to the roll of the waves, Babbalanja,
Mohi, and Yoomy, drooped lower and lower, like funeral plumes; and our
gloomy canoe seemed a hearse.




CHAPTER XVII.
They Regale Themselves With Their Pipes


“Ho! mortals! mortals!” cried Media. “Go we to bury our dead? Awake,
sons of men! Cheer up, heirs of immortality! Ho, Vee-Vee! bring forth
our pipes: we’ll smoke off this cloud.”

Nothing so beguiling as the fumes of tobacco, whether inhaled through
hookah, narghil, chibouque, Dutch porcelain, pure Principe, or Regalia.
And a great oversight had it been in King Media, to have omitted pipes
among the appliances of this voyage that we went. Tobacco in rouleaus
we had none; cigar nor cigarret; which little the company esteemed.
Pipes were preferred; and pipes we often smoked; testify, oh! Vee-Vee,
to that. But not of the vile clay, of which mankind and Etruscan vases
were made, were these jolly fine pipes of ours. But all in good time.

Now, the leaf called tobacco is of divers species and sorts. Not to
dwell upon vile Shag, Pig-tail, Plug, Nail-rod, Negro-head, Cavendish,
and misnamed Lady’s-twist, there are the following varieties:—Gold-
leaf, Oronoco, Cimaroza, Smyrna, Bird’s-eye, James-river,
Sweet-scented, Honey-dew, Kentucky, Cnaster, Scarfalati, and famed
Shiraz, or Persian. Of all of which, perhaps the last is the best.

But smoked by itself, to a fastidious wight, even Shiraz is not gentle
enough. It needs mitigation. And the cunning craft of so mitigating
even the mildest tobacco was well understood in the dominions of Media.
There, in plantations ever covered with a brooding, blue haze, they
raised its fine leaf in the utmost luxuriance; almost as broad as the
broad fans of the broad-bladed banana. The stalks of the leaf
withdrawn, the remainder they cut up, and mixed with soft willow-bark,
and the aromatic leaves of the Betel.

“Ho! Vee-Vee, bring forth the pipes,” cried Media. And forth they came,
followed by a quaint, carved cocoa-nut, agate-lidded, containing
ammunition sufficient for many stout charges and primings.

Soon we were all smoking so hard, that the canopied howdah, under which
we reclined, sent up purple wreaths like a Michigan wigwam. There we
sat in a ring, all smoking in council—every pipe a halcyon pipe of
peace.

And among those calumets, my lord Media’s showed like the turbaned
Grand Turk among his Bashaws. It was an extraordinary pipe, be sure; of
right royal dimensions. Its mouth-piece an eagle’s beak; its long stem,
a bright, red-barked cherry-tree branch, partly covered with a close
network of purple dyed porcupine quills; and toward the upper end,
streaming with pennons, like a Versailles flag-staff of a coronation
day. These pennons were managed by halyards; and after lighting his
prince’s pipe, it was little Vee-Vee’s part to run them up toward the
mast-head, or mouthpiece, in token that his lord was fairly under
weigh.

But Babbalanja’s was of a different sort; an immense, black, serpentine
stem of ebony, coiling this way and that, in endless convolutions, like
an anaconda round a traveler in Brazil. Smoking this hydra, Babbalanja
looked as if playing upon the trombone.

Next, gentle Yoomy’s. Its stem, a slender golden reed, like musical
Pan’s; its bowl very merry with tassels.

Lastly, old Mohi the chronicler’s. Its Death’s-head bowl forming its
latter end, continually reminding him of his own. Its shank was an
ostrich’s leg, some feathers still waving nigh the mouth-piece.

“Here, Vee-Vee! fill me up again,” cried Media, through the blue vapors
sweeping round his great gonfalon, like plumed Marshal Ney, waving his
baton in the smoke of Waterloo; or thrice gallant Anglesea, crossing
his wooden leg mid the reek and rack of the Apsley House banquet.

Vee-Vee obeyed; and quickly, like a howitzer, the pipe-owl was reloaded
to the muzzle, and King Media smoked on.

“Ah! this is pleasant indeed,” he cried. “Look, it’s a calm on the
waters, and a calm in our hearts, as we inhale these sedative odors.”

“So calm,” said Babbalanja; “the very gods must be smoking now.”

“And thus,” said Media, “we demi-gods hereafter shall cross-legged sit,
and smoke out our eternities. Ah, what a glorious puff! Mortals,
methinks these pipe-bowls of ours must be petrifactions of roses, so
scented they seem. But, old Mohi, you have smoked this many a long
year; doubtless, you know something about their material—the
Froth-of-the-Sea they call it, I think—ere my handicraft subjects
obtain it, to work into bowls. Tell us the tale.”

“Delighted to do so, my lord,” replied Mohi, slowly disentangling his
mouth-piece from the braids of his beard. “I have devoted much time and
attention to the study of pipe-bowls, and groped among many learned
authorities, to reconcile the clashing opinions concerning the origin
of the so-called Farnoo, or Froth-of-the-Sea.”

“Well, then, my old centenarian, give us the result of your
investigations. But smoke away: a word and a puff go on.”

“May it please you, then, my right worshipful lord, this Farnoo is an
unctuous, argillaceous substance; in its natural state, soft,
malleable, and easily worked as the cornelian-red clay from the famous
pipe-quarries of the wild tribes to the North. But though mostly found
buried in terra-firma, especially in the isles toward the East, this
Farnoo, my lord, is sometimes thrown up by the ocean; in seasons of
high sea, being plentifully found on the reefs. But, my lord, like
amber, the precise nature and origin of this Farnoo are points widely
mooted.”

“Stop there!” cried Media; “our mouth-pieces are of amber; so, not a
word more of the Froth-of-the-Sea, until something be said to clear up
the mystery of amber. What is amber, old man?”

“A still more obscure thing to trace than the other, my worshipful
lord. Ancient Plinnee maintained, that originally it must be a juice,
exuding from balsam firs and pines; Borhavo, that, like camphor, it is
the crystalized oil of aromatic ferns; Berzilli, that it is the
concreted scum of the lake Cephioris; and Vondendo, against scores of
antagonists, stoutly held it a sort of bituminous gold, trickling from
antediluvian smugglers’ caves, nigh the sea.”

“Why, old Braid-Beard,” cried Media, placing his pipe in rest, “you are
almost as erudite as our philosopher here.”

“Much more so, my lord,” said Babbalanja; “for Mohi has somehow picked
up all my worthless forgettings, which are more than my valuable
rememberings.”

“What say you, wise one?” cried Mohi, shaking his braids, like an
enraged elephant with many trunks.

Said Yoomy: “My lord, I have heard that amber is nothing less than the
congealed tears of broken-hearted mermaids.”

“Absurd, minstrel,” cried Mohi. “Hark ye; I know what it is. All other
authorities to the contrary, amber is nothing more than gold-fishes’
brains, made waxy, then firm, by the action of the sea.”

“Nonsense!” cried Yoomy.

“My lord,” said Braid-Beard, waving his pipe, this thing is just as I
say. Imbedded in amber, do we not find little fishes’ fins,
porpoise-teeth, sea-gulls’ beaks and claws; nay, butterflies’ wings,
and sometimes a topaz? And how could that be, unless the substance was
first soft? Amber is gold-fishes’ brains, I say.”

“For one,” said Babbalanja, “I’ll not believe that, till you prove to
me, Braid-Beard, that ideas themselves are found imbedded therein.”

“Another of your crazy conceits, philosopher,” replied Mohi,
disdainfully; “yet, sometimes plenty of strange black-letter characters
have been discovered in amber.” And throwing back his hoary old head,
he jetted forth his vapors like a whale.

“Indeed?” cried Babbalanja. “Then, my lord Media, it may be earnestly
inquired, whether the gentle laws of the tribes before the flood, were
not sought to be embalmed and perpetuated between transparent and sweet
scented tablets of amber.”

“That, now, is not so unlikely,” said Mohi; “for old King Rondo the
Round once set about getting him a coffin-lid of amber; much desiring a
famous mass of it owned by the ancestors of Donjalolo of Juam. But no
navies could buy it. So Rondo had himself urned in a crystal.”

“And that immortalized Rondo, no doubt,” said Babbalanja. “Ha! ha! pity
he fared not like the fat porpoise frozen and tombed in an iceberg; its
icy shroud drifting south, soon melted away, and down, out of sight,
sunk the dead.”

“Well, so much for amber,” cried Media. “Now, Mohi, go on about
Farnoo.”

“Know, then, my lord, that Farnoo is more like ambergris than amber.”

“Is it? then, pray, tell us something on that head. You know all about
ambergris, too, I suppose.”

“Every thing about all things, my lord. Ambergris is found both on land
and at sea. But especially, are lumps of it picked up on the spicy
coasts of Jovanna; indeed, all over the atolls and reefs in the eastern
quarter of Mardi.”

“But what is this ambergris? Braid-Beard,” said Babbalanja.

“Aquovi, the chymist, pronounced it the fragments of mushrooms growing
at the bottom of the sea; Voluto held, that like naptha, it springs
from fountains down there. But it is neither.”

“I have heard,” said Yoomy, “that it is the honey-comb of bees, fallen
from flowery cliffs into the brine.”

“Nothing of the kind,” said Mohi. “Do I not know all about it,
minstrel? Ambergris is the petrified gall-stones of crocodiles.”

“What!” cried Babbalanja, “comes sweet scented ambergris from those
musky and chain-plated river cavalry? No wonder, then, their flesh is
so fragrant; their upper jaws as the visors of vinaigrettes.”

“Nay, you are all wrong,” cried King Media.

Then, laughing to himself:—“It’s pleasant to sit by, a demi-god, and
hear the surmisings of mortals, upon things they know nothing about;
theology, or amber, or ambergris, it’s all the same. But then, did I
always out with every thing I know, there would be no conversing with
these comical creatures.

“Listen, old Mohi; ambergris is a morbid secretion of the Spermaceti
whale; for like you mortals, the whale is at times a sort of
hypochondriac and dyspeptic. You must know, subjects, that in
antediluvian times, the Spermaceti whale was much hunted by sportsmen,
that being accounted better pastime, than pursuing the Behemoths on
shore. Besides, it was a lucrative diversion. Now, sometimes upon
striking the monster, it would start off in a dastardly fright, leaving
certain fragments in its wake. These fragments the hunters picked up,
giving over the chase for a while. For in those days, as now, a
quarter-quintal of ambergris was more valuable than a whole ton of
spermaceti.”

“Nor, my lord,” said Babbalanja, “would it have been wise to kill the
fish that dropped such treasures: no more than to murder the noddy that
laid the golden eggs.”

“Beshrew me! a noddy it must have been,” gurgled Mohi through his
pipe-stem, “to lay golden eggs for others to hatch.”

“Come, no more of that now,” cried Media. “Mohi, how long think you,
may one of these pipe-bowls last?”

“My lord, like one’s cranium, it will endure till broken. I have smoked
this one of mine more than half a century.”

“But unlike our craniums, stocked full of concretions,” said
Babbalanja, our pipe-bowls never need clearing out.”

“True,” said Mohi, “they absorb the oil of the smoke, instead of
allowing it offensively to incrust.”

“Ay, the older the better,” said Media, “and the more delicious the
flavor imparted to the fumes inhaled.”

“Farnoos forever! my lord,” cried Yoomy. “By much smoking, the bowl
waxes russet and mellow, like the berry-brown cheek of a sunburnt
brunette.”

“And as like smoked hams,” cried Braid-Beard, “we veteran old smokers
grow browner and browner; hugely do we admire to see our jolly noses
and pipe-bowls mellowing together.”

“Well said, old man,” cried Babbalanja; “for, like a good wife, a pipe
is a friend and companion for life. And whoso weds with a pipe, is no
longer a bachelor. After many vexations, he may go home to that
faithful counselor, and ever find it full of kind consolations and
suggestions. But not thus with cigars or cigarrets: the acquaintances
of a moment, chatted with in by-places, whenever they come handy; their
existence so fugitive, uncertain, unsatisfactory. Once ignited, nothing
like longevity pertains to them. They never grow old. Why, my lord, the
stump of a cigarret is an abomination; and two of them crossed are more
of a _memento-mori_, than a brace of thigh-bones at right angles.”

“So they are, so they are,” cried King Media. “Then, mortals, puff we
away at our pipes. Puff, puff, I say. Ah! how we puff! But thus we
demi-gods ever puff at our ease.”

“Puff; puff, how we puff,” cried Babbalanja. “but life itself is a puff
and a wheeze. Our lungs are two pipes which we constantly smoke.”

“Puff, puff! how we puff,” cried old Mohi. “All thought is a puff.”

“Ay,” said Babbalanja, “not more smoke in that skull-bowl of yours than
in the skull on your shoulders: both ends alike.”

“Puff! puff! how we puff,” cried Yoomy. “But in every puff, there hangs
a wreath. In every puff, off flies a care.”

“Ay, there they go,” cried Mohi, “there goes another—and, there, and
there;—this is the way to get rid of them my worshipful lord; puff them
aside.”

“Yoomy,” said Media, “give us that pipe song of thine. Sing it, my
sweet and pleasant poet. We’ll keep time with the flageolets of ours.”

“So with pipes and puffs for a chorus, thus Yoomy sang:—

Care is all stuff:—
    Puff! Puff:
To puff is enough:—
    Puff! Puff!
More musky than snuff,
And warm is a puff:—
    Puff! Puff!
Here we sit mid our puffs,
Like old lords in their ruffs,
Snug as bears in their muffs:—
    Puff! Puff!
Then puff, puff, puff;
For care is all stuff,
Puffed off in a puff:—
    Puff! Puff!


“Ay, puff away,” cried Babbalanja, “puff; puff, so we are born, and so
die. Puff, puff, my volcanos: the great sun itself will yet go out in a
snuff, and all Mardi smoke out its last wick.”

“Puffs enough,” said King Media, “Vee-Vee! haul down my flag. There,
lie down before me, oh Gonfalon! and, subjects, hear,—when I die, lay
this spear on my right, and this pipe on my left, its colors at half
mast; so shall I be ambidexter, and sleep between eloquent symbols.”




CHAPTER XVIII.
They Visit An Extraordinary Old Antiquary


“About prows there, ye paddlers,” cried Media. “In this fog we’ve been
raising, we have sailed by Padulla, our destination.”

Now Padulla, was but a little island, tributary to a neighboring king;
its population embracing some hundreds of thousands of leaves, and
flowers, and butterflies, yet only two solitary mortals; one, famous as
a venerable antiquarian: a collector of objects of Mardian vertu; a
cognoscenti, and dilettante in things old and marvelous; and for that
reason, very choice of himself.

He went by the exclamatory cognomen of “Oh-Oh;” a name bestowed upon
him, by reason of the delighted interjections, with which he welcomed
all accessions to his museum.

Now, it was to obtain a glimpse of this very museum, that Media was
anxious to touch at Padulla.

Landing, and passing through a grove, we were accosted by Oh-Oh
himself; who, having heard the shouts of our paddlers, had sallied
forth, staff in hand.

The old man was a sight to see; especially his nose; a remarkable one.
And all Mardi over, a remarkable nose is a prominent feature: an ever
obvious passport to distinction. For, after all, this gaining a name,
is but the individualizing of a man; as well achieved by an
extraordinary nose, as by an extraordinary epic. Far better, indeed;
for you may pass poets without knowing them. Even a hero, is no hero
without his sword; nor Beelzebub himself a lion, minus that lasso-tail
of his, wherewith he catches his prey. Whereas, he who is famous
through his nose, it is impossible to overlook. He is a celebrity
without toiling for a name. Snugly ensconced behind his proboscis, he
revels in its shadow, receiving tributes of attention wherever he goes.

Not to enter at large upon the topography of Oh-Oh’s nasal organ, all
must be content with this; that it was of a singular magnitude, and
boldly aspiring at the end; an exclamation point in the face of the
wearer, forever wondering at the visible universe. The eyes of Oh-Oh
were like the creature’s that the Jew abhors: placed slanting in his
head, and converging their rays toward the mouth; which was no Mouth,
but a gash.

I mean not to be harsh, or unpleasant upon thee, Oh-Oh; but I must
paint thee as thou wert.

The rest of his person was crooked, and dwarfed, and surmounted by a
hump, that sat on his back like a burden. And a weary load is a hump,
Heaven knows, only to be cast off in the grave.

Thus old, and antiquated, and gable-ended, was the tabernacle of
Oh-Oh’s soul. But his person was housed in as curious a structure.
Built of old boughs of trees blown down in the groves, and covered over
with unruly thatching, it seemed, without, some ostrich nest. But
within, so intricate, and grotesque, its brown alleys and cells, that
the interior of no walnut was more labyrinthine.

And here, strewn about, all dusty and disordered, were the precious
antiques, and curios, and obsoletes, which to Oh-Oh were dear as the
apple of his eye, or the memory of departed days.

The old man was exceedingly importunate, in directing attention to his
relics; concerning each of which, he had an endless story to tell. Time
would fail; nay, patience, to repeat his legends. So, in order, here
follow the most prominent of his rarities:—


The identical Canoe, in which, ages back, the god Unja came from the
bottom of the sea. (Very ponderous; of lignum-vitae wood).

A stone Flower-pot, containing in the original soil, Unja’s last
footprints, when he embarked from Mardi for parts unknown. (One
foot-print unaccountably reversed).

The Jaw-bones of Tooroorooloo, a great orator in the days of Unja.
(Somewhat twisted).

A quaint little Fish-hook. (Made from the finger-bones of Kravi the
Cunning).

The mystic Gourd; carved all over with cabalistic triangles, and
hypogrifs; by study of which a reputed prophet, was said to have
obtained his inspiration. (Slightly redolent of vineyards).

The complete Skeleton of an immense Tiger-shark; the bones of a
Pearl-shell-diver’s leg inside. (Picked off the reef at low tide).

An inscrutable, shapeless block of a mottled-hued, smoke-dried wood.
(Three unaccountable holes drilled through the middle).

A sort of ecclesiastical Fasces, being the bony blades of nine sword-
fish, basket-hilted with shark’s jaws, braided round and tasseled with
cords of human hair. (Now obsolete).

The mystic Fan with which Unja fanned himself when in trouble. (Woven
from the leaves of the Water-Lily).

A Tripod of a Stork’s Leg, supporting a nautilus shell, containing the
fragments of a bird’s egg; into which, was said to have been magically
decanted the soul of a deceased chief. (Unfortunately crushed in by
atmospheric pressure).

Two clasped Right Hands, embalmed; being those of twin warriors, who
thus died on a battle-field. (Impossible to sunder).

A curious Pouch, or Purse, formed from the skin of an Albatross’ foot,
and decorated with three sharp claws, naturally pertaining to it.
(Originally the property of a notorious old Tooth-per-Tooth).

A long tangled lock of Mermaid’s Hair, much resembling the curling
silky fibres of the finer sea-weed. (Preserved between fins of the
dolphin).

A Mermaid’s Comb for the toilet. The stiff serrated crest of a Cook
Storm-petrel (Oh-Oh was particularly curious concerning Mermaids).

Files, Rasps, and Pincers, all bone, the implements of an eminent
Chiropedist, who flourished his tools before the flood. (Owing to the
excessive unevenness of the surface in those times, the diluvians were
peculiarly liable to pedal afflictions).

The back Tooth, that Zozo the Enthusiast, in token of grief, recklessly
knocked out at the decease of a friend. (Worn to a stump and quite
useless).


These wonders inspected, Oh-Oh conducted us to an arbor, to show us the
famous telescope, by help of which, he said he had discovered an
ant-hill in the moon. It rested in the crotch of a Bread-fruit tree;
and was a prodigiously long and hollow trunk of a Palm; a scale from a
sea-kraken its lens.

Then returning to his cabinet, he pointed to a bamboo microscope, which
had wonderfully assisted him in his entomological pursuits.

“By this instrument, my masters,” said he, “I have satisfied myself,
that in the eye of a dragon-fly there are precisely twelve thousand
five hundred and forty-one triangular lenses; and in the leg of a flea,
scores on scores of distinct muscles. Now, my masters, how far think
you a flea may leap at one spring? Why, two hundred times its own
length; I have often measured their leaps, with a small measure I use
for scientific purposes.”

“Truly, Oh-Oh,” said Babbalanja, “your discoveries must ere long result
in something grand; since you furnish such invaluable data for
theorists. Pray, attend, my lord Media. If, at one spring, a flea leaps
two hundred times its own length, then, with the like proportion of
muscles in his calves, a bandit might pounce upon the unwary traveler
from a quarter of a mile off. Is it not so, Oh-Oh?”

“Indeed, but it is, my masters. And one of the greatest consolations I
draw from these studies, is the ever-strengthening conviction of the
beneficent wisdom that framed our Mardi. For did men possess thighs in
proportion to fleas, verily, the wicked would grievously leap about,
and curvet in the isles.”

“But Oh-Oh,” said Babbalanja, “what other discoveries have you made?
Hast yet put a usurer under your lens, to find his conscience? or a
libertine, to find his heart? Hast yet brought your microscope to bear
upon a downy peach, or a rosy cheek?”

“I have,” said Oh-Oh, mournfully; “and from the moment I so did, I have
had no heart to eat a peach, or salute a cheek.”

“Then dash your lens!” cried Media.

“Well said, my lord. For all the eyes we get beyond our own, but
minister to infelicity. The microscope disgusts us with our Mardi; and
the telescope sets us longing for some other world.”




CHAPTER XIX.
They Go Down Into The Catacombs


With a dull flambeau, we now descended some narrow stone steps, to view
Oh-Oh’s collection of ancient and curious manuscripts, preserved in a
vault.

“This way, this way, my masters,” cried Oh-Oh, aloft, swinging his dim
torch. “Keep your hands before you; it’s a dark road to travel.”

“So it seems,” said Babbalanja, wide-groping, as he descended lower and
lower. “My lord this is like going down to posterity.”

Upon gaining the vault, forth flew a score or two of bats,
extinguishing the flambeau, and leaving us in darkness, like Belzoni
deserted by his Arabs in the heart of a pyramid. The torch at last
relumed, we entered a tomb-like excavation, at every step raising
clouds of dust; and at last stood before long rows of musty, mummyish
parcels, so dingy-red, and so rolled upon sticks, that they looked like
stiff sausages of Bologna; but smelt like some fine old Stilton or
Cheshire.

Most ancient of all, was a hieroglyphical Elegy on the Dumps,
consisting of one thousand and one lines; the characters,—herons,
weeping-willows, and ravens, supposed to have been traced by a quill
from the sea-noddy.

Then there were plenty of rare old ballads:—

“King Kroko, and the Fisher Girl.”
“The Fight at the Ford of Spears.”
“The Song of the Skulls.”


And brave old chronicles, that made Mohi’s mouth water:—

“The Rise and Setting of the Dynasty of Foofoo.”
“The Heroic History of the Noble Prince Dragoni; showing how he killed
ten Pinioned Prisoners with his Own Hand.”
“The whole Pedigree of the King of Kandidee, with that of his famous
horse, Znorto.”


And Tarantula books:—

“Sour Milk for the Young, by a Dairyman.”
“The Devil adrift, by a Corsair.”
“Grunts and Groans, by a Mad Boar.”
“Stings, by a Scorpion.”


And poetical productions:—

“Suffusions of a Lily in a Shower.”
“Sonnet on the last Breath of an Ephemera.”
“The Gad-fly, and Other Poems.”


And metaphysical treatises:—

“Necessitarian not Predestinarian.”
“Philosophical Necessity and Predestination One Thing and The Same.”
“Whatever is not, is.”
“Whatever is, is not.”


And scarce old memoirs:—

“The One Hundred Books of the Biography of the Great and Good King
Grandissimo.”
“The Life of old Philo, the Philanthropist, in one Chapter.”


And popular literature:—

“A most Sweet, Pleasant, and Unctuous Account of the Manner in which
Five-and-Forty Robbers were torn asunder by Swiftly-Going Canoes.”


And books by chiefs and nobles:—

“The Art of Making a Noise in Mardi.”
“On the Proper Manner of Saluting a Bosom Friend.”
“Letters from a Father to a Son, inculcating the Virtue of Vice.”
“Pastorals by a Younger Son.”
“A Catalogue of Chieftains who have been Authors, by a Chieftain, who
disdains to be deemed an Author.”
“A Canto on a Cough caught by my Consort.”
“The Philosophy of Honesty, by a late Lord, who died in disgrace.”


And theological works:—

“Pepper for the Perverse.”
“Pudding for the Pious.”
“Pleas for Pardon.”
“Pickles for the Persecuted.”


And long and tedious romances with short and easy titles:—

“The Buck.”
“The Belle.”
“The King and the Cook, or the Cook and the King.”


And books of voyages:—

“A Sojourn among the Anthropophagi, by One whose Hand was eaten off at
Tiffin among the Savages.”
“Franko: its King, Court, and Tadpoles.”
“Three Hours in Vivenza, containing a Full and Impartial Account of
that Whole Country: by a Subject of King Bello.”


And works of nautical poets:—

“Sky-Sail-Pole Lyrics.”


And divers brief books, with panic-striking titles:—

“Are you safe?”
“A Voice from Below.”
“Hope for none.”
“Fire for all.”


And pamphlets by retired warriors:—

“On the Best Gravy for Wild Boar’s Meat.”
“Three Receipts for Bottling New Arrack.”
“To Brown Bread Fruit without Burning.”
“Advice to the Dyspeptic.”
“On Starch for Tappa.”


All these MSS. were highly prized by Oh-Oh. He averred, that they spoke
of the mighty past, which he reverenced more than the paltry present,
the dross and sediment of what had been.

Peering into a dark crypt, Babbalanja drew forth a few crumbling,
illegible, black-letter sheets of his favorite old essayist, brave
Bardianna. They seemed to have formed parts of a work, whose title only
remained—“Thoughts, by a Thinker.”

Silently Babbalanja pressed them to his heart. Then at arm’s length
held them, and said, “And is all this wisdom lost? Can not the divine
cunning in thee, Bardianna, transmute to brightness these sullied
pages? Here, perhaps, thou didst dive into the deeps of things,
treating of the normal forms of matter and of mind; how the particles
of solids were first molded in the interstices of fluids; how the
thoughts of men are each a soul, as the lung-cells are each a lung; how
that death is but a mode of life; while mid-most is the Pharzi.— But
all is faded. Yea, here the Thinker’s thoughts lie cheek by jowl with
phrasemen’s words. Oh Bardianna! these pages were offspring of thee,
thought of thy thought, soul of thy soul. Instinct with mind, they once
spoke out like living voices; now, they’re dust; and would not prick a
fool to action. Whence then is this? If the fogs of some few years can
make soul linked to matter naught; how can the unhoused spirit hope to
live when mildewed with the damps of death.”

Piously he folded the shreds of manuscript together, kissed them, and
laid them down.

Then approaching Oh-Oh, he besought him for one leaf, one shred of
those most precious pages, in memory of Bardianna, and for the love of
him.

But learning who he was, one of that old Ponderer’s commentators, Oh-Oh
tottered toward the manuscripts; with trembling fingers told them over,
one by one, and said—“Thank Oro! all are here.—Philosopher, ask me for
my limbs, my life, my heart, but ask me not for these. Steeped in wax,
these shall be my cerements.”

All in vain; Oh-Oh was an antiquary.

Turning in despair, Babbalanja spied a heap of worm-eaten parchment
covers, and many clippings and parings. And whereas the rolls of
manuscripts did smell like unto old cheese; so these relics did
marvelously resemble the rinds of the same.

Turning over this pile, Babbalanja lighted upon something that restored
his good humor. Long he looked it over delighted; but bethinking him,
that he must have dragged to day some lost work of the collection, and
much desirous of possessing it, he made bold again to ply Oh-Oh;
offering a tempting price for his discovery.

Glancing at the title—“A Happy Life”—the old man cried—“Oh, rubbish!
rubbish! take it for nothing.” And Babbalanja placed it in his
vestment.

The catacombs surveyed, and day-light gained, we inquired the way to
Ji-Ji’s, also a collector, but of another sort; one miserly in the
matter of teeth, the money of Mardi.

At the mention of his name, Oh-Oh flew out into scornful philippics
upon the insanity of that old dotard, who hoarded up teeth, as if teeth
were of any use, but to purchase rarities. Nevertheless, he pointed out
our path; following which, we crossed a meadow.




CHAPTER XX.
Babbalanja Quotes From An Antique Pagan; And Earnestly Presses It Upon
The Company, That What He Recites Is Not His But Another’s


Journeying on, we stopped by a gurgling spring, in a beautiful grove;
and here, we stretched out on the grass, and our attendants unpacked
their hampers, to provide us a lunch.

But as for that Babbalanja of ours, he must needs go and lunch by
himself, and, like a cannibal, feed upon an author; though in other
respects he was not so partial to bones.

Bringing forth the treasure he had buried in his bosom, he was soon
buried in it; and motionless on his back, looked as if laid out, to
keep an appointment with his undertaker.

“What, ho! Babbalanja!” cried Media from under a tree, “don’t be a
duck, there, with your bill in the air; drop your metaphysics, man, and
fall to on the solids. Do you hear?”

“Come, philosopher,” said Mohi, handling a banana, “you will weigh more
after you have eaten.”

“Come, list, Babbalanja,” cried Yoomy, “I am going to sing.”

“Up! up! I say,” shouted Media again. “But go, old man, and wake him:
rap on his head, and see whether he be in.”

Mohi, obeying, found him at home; and Babbalanja started up.

“In Oro’s name, what ails you, philosopher? See you Paradise, that you
look so wildly?”

“A Happy Life! a Happy Life!” cried Babbalanja, in an ecstasy. “My
lord, I am lost in the dream of it, as here recorded. Marvelous book!
its goodness transports me. Let me read:—‘I would bear the same mind,
whether I be rich or poor, whether I get or lose in the world. I will
reckon benefits well placed as the fairest part of my possession, not
valuing them by number or weight, but by the profit and esteem of the
receiver; accounting myself never the poorer for any thing I give. What
I do shall be done for conscience, not ostentation. I will eat and
drink, not to gratify my palate, but to satisfy nature. I will be
cheerful to my friends, mild and placable to my enemies. I will prevent
an honest request, if I can foresee it; and I will grant it, without
asking. I will look upon the whole world as my country; and upon Oro,
both as the witness and the judge of my words and my deeds. I will live
and die with this testimony: that I loved a good conscience; that I
never invaded another man’s liberty; and that I preserved my own. I
will govern my life and my thoughts, as if the whole world were to see
the one, and to read the other; for what does it signify, to make any
thing a secret to my neighbor, when to Oro all our privacies are
open.’”

“Very fine,” said Media.

“The very spirit of the first followers of Alma, as recorded in the
legends,” said Mohi.

“Inimitable,” said Yoomy.

Said Babbalanja, “Listen again:—‘Righteousness is sociable and gentle;
free, steady, and fearless; full of inexhaustible delights.’ And here
again, and here, and here:—The true felicity of life is to understand
our duty to Oro.’—‘True joy is a serene and sober motion.’ And here,
and here,—my lord, ’tis hard quoting from this book;—but listen—‘A
peaceful conscience, honest thoughts, and righteous actions are
blessings without end, satiety, or measure. The poor man wants many
things; the covetous man, all. It is not enough to know Oro, unless we
obey him.’”

“Alma all over,” cried Mohi; “sure, you read from his sayings?”

“I read but odd sentences from one, who though he lived ages ago, never
saw, scarcely heard of Alma. And mark me, my lord, this time I
improvise nothing. What I have recited, Is here. Mohi, this book is
more marvelous than the prophecies. My lord, that a mere man, and a
heathen, in that most heathenish time, should give utterance to such
heavenly wisdom, seems more wonderful than that an inspired prophet
should reveal it. And is it not more divine in this philosopher, to
love righteousness for its own sake, and in view of annihilation, than
for pious sages to extol it as the means of everlasting felicity?”

“Alas,” sighed Yoomy, “and does he not promise us any good thing, when
we are dead?”

“He speaks not by authority. He but woos us to goodness and happiness
here.”

“Then, Babbalanja,” said Media, “keep your treasure to yourself.
Without authority, and a full right hand, Righteousness better be
silent. Mardi’s religion must seem to come direct from Oro, and the
mass of you mortals endeavor it not, except for a consideration,
present or to come.”

“And call you that righteousness, my lord, which is but the price paid
down for something else?”

“I called it not righteousness; it is religion so called. But let us
prate no more of these things; with which I, a demi-god, have but
little in common. It ever impairs my digestion. No more, Babbalanja.”

“My lord! my lord! out of itself, Religion has nothing to bestow. Nor
will she save us from aught, but from the evil in ourselves. Her one
grand end is to make us wise; her only manifestations are reverence to
Oro and love to man; her only, but ample reward, herself. He who has
this, has all. He who has this, whether he kneel to an image of wood,
calling it Oro; or to an image of air, calling it the same; whether he
fasts or feasts; laughs or weeps;—that man can be no richer. And this
religion, faith, virtue, righteousness, good, whate’er you will, I find
in this book I hold. No written page can teach me more.”

“Have you that, then, of which you speak, Babbalanja? Are you content,
there where you stand?”

“My lord, you drive me home. I am not content. The mystery of mysteries
is still a mystery. How this author came to be so wise, perplexes me.
How he led the life he did, confounds me. Oh, my lord, I am in
darkness, and no broad blaze comes down to flood me. The rays that come
to me are but faint cross lights, mazing the obscurity wherein I live.
And after all, excellent as it is, I can be no gainer by this book. For
the more we learn, the more we unlearn; we accumulate not, but
substitute; and take away, more than we add. We dwindle while we grow;
we sally out for wisdom, and retreat beyond the point whence we
started; we essay the Fondiza, and get but the Phe. Of all simpletons,
the simplest! Oh! that I were another sort of fool than I am, that I
might restore my good opinion of myself. Continually I stand in the
pillory, am broken on the wheel, and dragged asunder by wild horses.
Yes, yes, Bardianna, all is in a nut, as thou sayest; but all my back
teeth can not crack it; I but crack my own jaws. All round me, my
fellow men are new-grafting their vines, and dwelling in flourishing
arbors; while I am forever pruning mine, till it is become but a stump.
Yet in this pruning will I persist; I will not add, I will diminish; I
will train myself down to the standard of what is unchangeably true.
Day by day I drop off my redundancies; ere long I shall have stripped
my ribs; when I die, they will but bury my spine. Ah! where, where,
where, my lord, is the everlasting Tekana? Tell me, Mohi, where the
Ephina? I may have come to the Penultimate, but where, sweet Yoomy, is
the Ultimate? Ah, companions! I faint, I am wordless:- -something,
nothing, riddles,—does Mardi hold her?”

“He swoons!” cried Yoomy.

“Water! water!” cried Media.

“Away:” said Babbalanja serenely, “I revive.”




CHAPTER XXI.
They Visit A Wealthy Old Pauper


Continuing our route to Jiji’s, we presently came to a miserable hovel.
Half projecting from the low, open entrance, was a bald overgrown head,
intent upon an upright row of dark-colored bags:— pelican
pouches—prepared by dropping a stone within, and suspending them, when
moist.

Ever and anon, the great head shook with a tremulous motion, as one by
one, to a clicking sound from the old man’s mouth, the strings of teeth
were slowly drawn forth, and let fall, again and again, with a rattle.

But perceiving our approach, the old miser suddenly swooped his pouches
out of sight; and, like a turtle into its shell, retreated into his
den. But soon he decrepitly emerged upon his knees, asking what brought
us thither?—to steal the teeth, which lying rumor averred he possessed
in abundance? And opening his mouth, he averred he had none; not even a
sentry in his head.

But Babbalanja declared, that long since he must have drawn his own
dentals, and bagged them with the rest.

Now this miserable old miser must have been idiotic; for soon
forgetting what he had but just told us of his utter toothlessness, he
was so smitten with the pearly mouth of Hohora, one of our attendants
(the same for whose pearls, little King Peepi had taken such a fancy),
that he made the following overture to purchase its contents: namely:
one tooth of the buyer’s, for every three of the seller’s. A
proposition promptly rejected, as involving a mercantile absurdity.

“Why?” said Babbalanja. “Doubtless, because that proposed to be given,
is less than that proposed to be received. Yet, says a philosopher,
this is the very principle which regulates all barterings. For where
the sense of a simple exchange of quantities, alike in value?”

“Where, indeed?” said Hohora with open eyes, “though I never heard it
before, that’s a staggering question. I beseech you, who was the sage
that asked it?”

“Vivo, the Sophist,” said Babbalanja, turning aside.

In the hearing of Jiji, allusion was made to Oh-Oh, as a neighbor of
his. Whereupon he vented much slavering opprobrium upon that miserable
old hump-back; who accumulated useless monstrosities; throwing away the
precious teeth, which otherwise might have sensibly rattled in his own
pelican pouches.

When we quitted the hovel, Jiji, marking little Vee-Vee, from whose
shoulder hung a calabash of edibles, seized the hem of his garment and
besought him for one mouthful of food; for nothing had he tasted that
day.

The boy tossed him a yam.




CHAPTER XXII.
Yoomy Sings Some Odd Verses, And Babbalanja Quotes From The Old Authors
Right And Left


Sailing from Padulla, after many pleasant things had been said
concerning the sights there beheld; Babbalanja thus addressed Yoomy—
“Warbler, the last song you sung was about moonlight, and paradise, and
fabulous pleasures evermore: now, have you any hymns about earthly
felicity?”

“If so, minstrel,” said Media, “jet it forth, my fountain, forthwith.”

“Just now, my lord,” replied Yoomy, “I was singing to myself, as I
often do, and by your leave, I will continue aloud.”

“Better begin at the beginning, I should think,” said the chronicler,
both hands to his chin, beginning at the top to new braid his beard.

“No: like the roots of your beard, old Mohi, all beginnings are stiff,”
cried Babbalanja. “We are lucky in living midway in eternity. So sing
away, Yoomy, where you left off,” and thus saying he unloosed his
girdle for the song, as Apicius would for a banquet.

“Shall I continue aloud, then, my lord?”

My lord nodded, and Yoomy sang:—

“Full round, full soft, her dewy arms,—
Sweet shelter from all Mardi’s harms!”


“Whose arms?” cried Mohi.

Sang Yoomy:—

Diving deep in the sea,
    She takes sunshine along:
Down flames in the sea,
    As of dolphins a throng.


“What mermaid is this?” cried Mohi.

Sang Yoomy:—

Her foot, a falling sound,
That all day long might bound.
    Over the beach,
    The soft sand beach,
    And none would find
    A trace behind.


“And why not?” demanded Media, “why could no trace be found?”

Said Braid-Beard, “Perhaps owing, my lord, to the flatness of the
mermaid’s foot. But no; that can not be; for mermaids are all vertebrae
below the waist.”

“Your fragment is pretty good, I dare say, Yoomy,” observed Media, “but
as Braid-Beard hints, rather flat.”

“Flat as the foot of a man with his mind made up,” cried Braid-Beard.
“Yoomy, did you sup on flounders last night?”

But Yoomy vouchsafed no reply, he was ten thousand leagues off in a
reverie: somewhere in the Hyades perhaps.

Conversation proceeding, Braid-Beard happened to make allusion to one
Rotato, a portly personage, who, though a sagacious philosopher, and
very ambitious to be celebrated as such, was only famous in Mardi as
the fattest man of his tribe.

Said Media, “Then, Mohi, Rotato could not pick a quarrel with Fame,
since she did not belie him. Fat he was, and fat she published him.”

“Right, my lord,” said Babbalanja, “for Fame is not always so honest.
Not seldom to be famous, is to be widely known for what you are not,
says Alla-Malolla. Whence it comes, as old Bardianna has it, that for
years a man may move unnoticed among his fellows; but all at once, by
some chance attitude, foreign to his habit, become a trumpet-full for
fools; though, in himself, the same as ever. Nor has he shown himself
yet; for the entire merit of a man can never be made known; nor the sum
of his demerits, if he have them. We are only known by our names; as
letters sealed up, we but read each other’s superscriptions.

“So with the commonalty of us Mardians. How then with those beings who
every way are but too apt to be riddles. In many points the works of
our great poet Vavona, now dead a thousand moons, still remain a
mystery. Some call him a mystic; but wherein he seems obscure, it is,
perhaps, we that are in fault; not by premeditation spoke he those
archangel thoughts, which made many declare, that Vavona, after all,
was but a crack-pated god, not a mortal of sound mind. But had he been
less, my lord, he had seemed more. Saith Fulvi, ‘Of the highest order
of genius, it may be truly asserted, that to gain the reputation of
superior power, it must partially disguise itself; it must come down,
and then it will be applauded for soaring.’ And furthermore, that there
are those who falter in the common tongue, because they think in
another; and these are accounted stutterers and stammerers.’”

“Ah! how true!” cried the Warbler.

“And what says the archangel Vavona, Yoomy, in that wonderful drama of
his, ‘The Souls of the Sages?’—‘Beyond most barren hills, there are
landscapes ravishing; with but one eye to behold; which no pencil can
portray.’ What wonder then, my lord, that Mardi itself is so blind.
‘Mardi is a monster,’ says old Bardianna, ‘whose eyes are fixed in its
head, like a whale’s; it can see but two ways, and those comprising but
a small arc of a perfect vision. Poets, heroes, and men of might, are
all around this monster Mardi. But stand before me on stilts, or I will
behold you not, says the monster; brush back your hair; inhale the wind
largely; lucky are all men with dome-like foreheads; luckless those
with pippin-heads; loud lungs are a blessing; a lion is no lion that
can not roar.’ Says Aldina, ‘There are those looking on, who know
themselves to be swifter of foot than the racers, but are confounded
with the simpletons that stare.’”

“The mere carping of a disappointed cripple,” cried Mold. His
biographer states, that Aldina had only one leg.”

“Braid-Beard, you are witty,” said Babbbalanja, adjusting his robe. “My
lord, there are heroes without armies, who hear martial music in their
souls.”

“Why not blow their trumpets louder, then,” cried Media, that all Mardi
may hear?”

“My lord Media, too, is witty, Babbalanja,” said Mohi.

Breathed Yoomy, “There are birds of divinest plumage, and most glorious
song, yet singing their lyrics to themselves.”

Said Media, “The lark soars high, cares for no auditor, yet its sweet
notes are heard here below. It sings, too, in company with myriads of
mates. Your soliloquists, Yoomy, are mostly herons and owls.”

Said Babbalanja, “Very clever, my lord; but think you not, there are
men eloquent, who never babble in the marketplace?”

“Ay, and arrant babblers at home. In few words, Babbalanja, you espouse
a bad cause. Most of you mortals are peacocks; some having tails, and
some not; those who have them will be sure to thrust their plumes in
your face; for the rest, they will display their bald cruppers, and
still screech for admiration. But when a great genius is born into
Mardi, he nods, and is known.”

“More wit, but, with deference, perhaps less truth, my lord. Say what
you will, Fame is an accident; merit a thing absolute. But what matter?
Of what available value reputation, unless wedded to power, dentals, or
place? To those who render him applause, a poet’s may seem a thing
tangible; but to the recipient, ’tis a fantasy; the poet never so
stretches his imagination, as when striving to comprehend what it is;
often, he is famous without knowing it.”

“At the sacred games of Lazella,” said Yoomy, “slyly crowned from
behind with a laurel fillet, for many hours, the minstrel Jarmi
wandered about ignorant of the honors he bore. But enlightened at last,
he doffed the wreath; then, holding it at arm’s length, sighed
forth—Oh, ye laurels! to be visible to me, ye must be removed from my
brow!”

“And what said Botargo,” cried Babbalanja, “hearing that his poems had
been translated into the language of the remote island of Bertranda?—
‘It stirs me little; already, in merry fancies, have I dreamed of their
being trilled by the blessed houris in paradise; I can only imagine the
same of the damsels of Bertranda.’ Says Boldo, the
Materialist,—‘Substances alone are satisfactory.’”

“And so thought the mercenary poet, Zenzi,” said Yoomy. “Upon receiving
fourteen ripe yams for a sonnet, one for every line, he said to me,
Yoomy, I shall make a better meal upon these, than upon so many
compliments.”

“Ay,” cried Babbalanja, “‘Bravos,’ saith old Bardianna, but induce
flatulency.’”

Said Media, “And do you famous mortals, then, take no pleasure in
hearing your bravos?”

“Much, my good lord; at least such famous mortals, so enamored of a
clamorous notoriety, as to bravo for themselves, when none else will
huzza; whose whole existence is an unintermitting consciousness of
self; whose very persons stand erect and self-sufficient as their
infallible index, the capital letter I; who relish and comprehend no
reputation but what attaches to the carcass; who would as lief be
renowned for a splendid mustache, as for a splendid drama: who know not
how it was that a personage, to posterity so universally celebrated as
the poet Vavona, ever passed through the crowd unobserved; who deride
the very thunder for making such a noise in Mardi, and yet disdain to
manifest itself to the eye.”

“Wax not so warm, Babbalanja; but tell us, if to his contemporaries
Vavona’s person was almost unknown, what satisfaction did he derive
from his genius?”

“Had he not its consciousness?—an empire boundless as the West. What to
him were huzzas? Why, my lord, from his privacy, the great and good
Logodora sent liniment to the hoarse throats without. But what said
Bardianna, when they dunned him for autographs?—‘Who keeps the register
of great men? who decides upon noble actions? and how long may ink
last? Alas! Fame has dropped more rolls than she displays; and there
are more lost chronicles, than the perished books of the historian
Livella.’ But what is lost forever, my lord, is nothing to what is now
unseen. There are more treasures in the bowels of the earth, than on
its surface.”

“Ah! no gold,” cried Yoomy, “but that comes from dark mines.”

Said Babbalanja, “Bear witness, ye gods! cries fervent old Bardianna,
that besides disclosures of good and evil undreamed of now, there will
be other, and more astounding revelations hereafter, of what has passed
in Mardi unbeheld.”

“A truce to your everlasting pratings of old Bardianna,” said King
Media; why not speak your own thoughts, Babbalanja? then would your
discourse possess more completeness; whereas, its warp and woof are of
all sorts,—Bardianna, Alla-Malolla, Vavona, and all the writers that
ever have written. Speak for yourself, mortal!”

“May you not possibly mistake, my lord? for I do not so much quote
Bardianna, as Bardianna quoted me, though he flourished before me; and
no vanity, but honesty to say so. The catalogue of true thoughts is but
small; they are ubiquitous; no man’s property; and unspoken, or
bruited, are the same. When we hear them, why seem they so natural,
receiving our spontaneous approval? why do we think we have heard them
before? Because they but reiterate ourselves; they were in us, before
we were born. The truest poets are but mouth-pieces; and some men are
duplicates of each other; I see myself in Bardianna.”

“And there, for Oro’s sake, let it rest, Babbalanja; Bardianna in you,
and you in Bardianna forever!”




CHAPTER XXIII.
What Manner Of Men The Tapparians Were


The canoes sailed on. But we leave them awhile. For our visit to Jiji,
the last visit we made, suggests some further revelations concerning
the dental money of Mardi.

Ere this, it should have been mentioned, that throughout the
Archipelago, there was a restriction concerning incisors and molars, as
ornaments for the person; none but great chiefs, brave warriors, and
men distinguished by rare intellectual endowments, orators, romancers,
philosophers, and poets, being permitted to sport them as jewels.
Though, as it happened, among the poets there were many who had never a
tooth, save those employed at their repasts; which, coming but seldom,
their teeth almost corroded in their mouths. Hence, in commerce, poets’
teeth were at a discount.

For these reasons, then, many mortals blent with the promiscuous mob of
Mardians, who, by any means, accumulated teeth, were fain to assert
their dental claims to distinction, by clumsily carrying their
treasures in pelican pouches slung over their shoulders; which pouches
were a huge burden to carry about, and defend. Though, in good truth,
from any of these porters, it was harder to wrench his pouches, than
his limbs. It was also a curious circumstance that at the slightest
casual touch, these bags seemed to convey a simultaneous thrill to the
owners.

Besides these porters, there were others, who exchanged their teeth for
richly stained calabashes, elaborately carved canoes, and more
especially, for costly robes, and turbans; in which last, many outshone
the noblest-born nobles. Nevertheless, this answered not the end they
had in view; some of the crowd only admiring what they wore, and not
them; breaking out into laudation of the inimitable handiwork of the
artisans of Mardi.

And strange to relate, these artisans themselves often came to be men
of teeth and turbans, sporting their bravery with the best. A
circumstance, which accounted for the fact, that many of the class
above alluded to, were considered capital judges of tappa and
tailoring.

Hence, as a general designation, the whole tribe went by the name of
Tapparians; otherwise, Men of Tappa.

Now, many moons ago, according to Braid-Beard, the Tapparians of a
certain cluster of islands, seeing themselves hopelessly confounded
with the plebeian race of mortals; such as artificers, honest men,
bread-fruit bakers, and the like; seeing, in short, that nature had
denied them every inborn mark of distinction; and furthermore, that
their external assumptions were derided by so many in Mardi, these
selfsame Tapparians, poor devils, resolved to secede from the rabble;
form themselves into a community of their own; and conventionally pay
that homage to each other, which universal Mardi could not be prevailed
upon to render to them.

Jointly, they purchased an island, called Pimminee, toward the extreme
west of the lagoon; and thither they went; and framing a code of laws-
-amazingly arbitrary, considering they themselves were the framers—
solemnly took the oath of allegiance to the commonwealth thus
established. Regarded section by section, this code of laws seemed
exceedingly trivial; but taken together, made a somewhat imposing
aggregation of particles.

By this code, the minutest things in life were all ordered after a
specific fashion. More especially one’s dress was legislated upon, to
the last warp and woof. All girdles must be so many inches in length,
and with such a number of tassels in front. For a violation of this
ordinance, before the face of all Mardi, the most dutiful of sons would
cut the most affectionate of fathers.

Now, though like all Mardi, kings and slaves included, the people of
Pimminee had dead dust for grandsires, they seldom reverted to that
fact; for, like all founders of families, they had no family vaults.
Nor were they much encumbered by living connections; connections, some
of them appeared to have none. Like poor Logan the last of his tribe,
they seemed to have monopolized the blood of their race, having never a
cousin to own.

Wherefore it was, that many ignorant Mardians, who had not pushed their
investigations into the science of physiology, sagely divined, that the
Tapparians must have podded into life like peas, instead of being
otherwise indebted for their existence. Certain it is, they had a
comical way of backing up their social pretensions. When the
respectability of his clan was mooted, Paivai, one of their bucks,
disdained all reference to the Dooms-day Book, and the ancients. More
reliable evidence was had. He referred the anxious world to a witness,
still alive and hearty,—his contemporary tailor; the varlet who cut out
his tappa doublets, and rejoiced his soul with good fits.

“Ah!” sighed Babbalanja, “how it quenches in one the thought of
immortality, to think that these Tapparians too, will hereafter claim
each a niche!”

But we rove. Our visit to Pimminee itself, will best make known the
ways of its denizens.




CHAPTER XXIV.
Their Adventures Upon Landing At Pimminee


A long sail over, the island of Pimminee came in sight; one dead fiat,
wreathed in a thin, insipid vapor.

“My lord, why land?” said Babbalanja; “no Yillah is here.”

“’Tis my humor, Babbalanja.”

Said Yoomy, “Taji would leave no isle unexplored.”

As we neared the beach, the atmosphere became still closer and more
languid. Much did we miss the refreshing balm which breathed in the
fine breezy air of the open lagoon. Of a slender and sickly growth
seemed the trees; in the meadows, the grass grew small and mincing.

Said Media, “Taji, from the accounts which Braid-Beard gives, there
must be much to amuse, in the ways of these Tapparians.”

“Yes,” said Babbalanja, “their lives are a continual farce,
gratuitously performed for the diversion of Mardi. My lord, perhaps we
had best doff our dignity, and land among them as persons of lowly
condition; for then, we shall receive more diversion, though less
hospitality.”

“A good proposition,” said Media.

And so saying, he put off his robe for one less pretentious.

All followed suit; Yoomy doffing turban and sash; and, at last,
completely metamorphosed, we looked like Hungarian gipsies.

Voyaging on, we entered a bay, where numbers of menials were standing
in the water, engaged in washing the carved work of certain fantastic
canoes, belonging to the Tapparians, their masters.

Landing at some distance, we followed a path that soon conducted us to
a betwisted dwelling of bamboos, where, gently, we knocked for
admittance. So doing, we were accosted by a servitor, his portliness
all in his calves. Marking our appearance, he monopolized the
threshold, and gruffly demanded what was wanted.

“Strangers, kind sir, fatigued with travel, and in need of refreshment
and repose.”

“Then hence with ye, vagabonds!” and with an emphasis, he closed the
portal in our face.

Said Babbalanja, turning, “You perceive, my lord Media, that these
varlets take after their masters; who feed none but the well-fed, and
house none but the well-housed.”

“Faith! but they furnish most rare entertainment, nevertheless,” cried
Media. “Ha! ha! Taji, we had missed much, had we missed Pimminee.”

As this was said, we observed, at a distance, three menials running
from seaward, as if conveying important intelligence.

Halting here and there, vainly seeking admittance at other habitations,
and receiving nothing but taunts for our pains, we still wandered on;
and at last came upon a village, toward which, those from the sea-side
had been running.

And now, to our surprise, we were accosted by an eager and servile
throng.

“Obsequious varlets,” said Media, “where tarry your masters?”

“Right royal, and thrice worshipful Lord of Odo, do you take us for our
domestics? We are Tapparians, may it please your illustrious Highness;
your most humble and obedient servants. We beseech you, supereminent
Sir, condescend to visit our habitations, and partake of our cheer.”

Then turning upon their attendants, “Away with ye, hounds! and set our
dwellings in order.”

“How know ye me to be king?” asked Media.

“Is it not in your serene Highness’s regal port, and eye?”

“’Twas their menials,” muttered Mohi, “who from the paddlers in charge
of our canoes must have learned who my lord was, and published the
tidings.”

After some further speech, Media made a social surrender of himself to
the foremost of the Tapparians, one Nimni; who, conducting us to his
abode, with much deference introduced us to a portly old Begum, and
three slender damsels; his wife and daughters.

Soon, refreshments appeared:—green and yellow compounds, and divers
enigmatical dainties; besides vegetable liqueurs of a strange and
alarming flavor served in fragile little leaves, folded into cups, and
very troublesome to handle.

Excessively thirsty, Babbalanja made bold to inquire for water; which
called forth a burst of horror from the old Begum, and minor shrieks
from her daughters; who declared, that the beverage to which remote
reference had been made, was far too widely diffused in Mardi, to be at
all esteemed in Pimminee.

“But though we seldom imbibe it,” said the old Begum, ceremoniously
adjusting her necklace of cowrie-shells, “we occasionally employ it for
medicinal purposes.”

“Ah, indeed?” said Babbalanja.

“But oh! believe me; even then, we imbibe not the ordinary fluid of the
springs and streams; but that which in afternoon showers softly drains
from our palm-trees into the little hollow or miniature reservoir
beneath its compacted roots.”

A goblet of this beverage was now handed Babbalanja; but having a
curious, gummy flavor, it proved any thing but palatable.

Presently, in came a company of young men, relatives of Nimni. They
were slender as sky-sail-poles; standing in a row, resembled a
picket-fence; and were surmounted by enormous heads of hair, combed out
all round, variously dyed, and evened by being singed with a lighted
wisp of straw. Like milliners’ parcels, they were very neatly done up;
wearing redolent robes.

“How like the woodlands they smell,” whispered Yoomy. “Ay, marvelously
like sap,” said Mohi.

One part of their garniture consisted of numerous tasseled cords, like
those of an aigulette, depending from the neck, and attached here and
there about the person. A separate one, at a distance, united their
ankles. These served to measure and graduate their movements; keeping
their gestures, paces, and attitudes, within the prescribed standard of
Tapparian gentility. When they went abroad, they were preceded by
certain footmen; who placed before them small, carved boards, whereon
their masters stepped; thus avoiding contact with the earth. The simple
device of a shoe, as a fixture for the foot, was unknown in Pimminee.

Being told, that Taji was lately from the sun, they manifested not the
slightest surprise; one of them incidentally observing, however, that
the eclipses there, must be a sad bore to endure.




CHAPTER XXV.
A, I, AND O


The old Begum went by the euphonious appellation of
Ohiro-Moldona-Fivona; a name, from its length, deemed highly genteel;
though scandal averred, that it was nothing more than her real name
transposed; the appellation by which she had been formerly known,
signifying a “Getterup-of-Fine-Tappa.” But as this would have let out
an ancient secret, it was thought wise to disguise it.

Her daughters respectively reveled in the pretty diminutives of A, I,
and O; which, from their brevity, comical to tell, were considered
equally genteel with the dame’s.

The habiliments of the three Vowels must not be omitted. Each damsel
garrisoned an ample, circular farthingale of canes, serving as the
frame-work, whereon to display a gayly dyed robe. Perhaps their charms
intrenched themselves in these impregnable petticoats, as feeble armies
fly to fortresses, to hide their weakness, and better resist an onset.

But polite and politic it is, to propitiate your hostess. So seating
himself by the Begum, Taji led off with earnest inquiries after her
welfare. But the Begum was one of those, who relieve the diffident from
the embarrassment of talking; all by themselves carrying on
conversation for two. Hence, no wonder that my Lady was esteemed
invaluable at all assemblies in the groves of Pimminee; contributing so
largely to that incessant din, which is held the best test of the
enjoyment of the company, as making them deaf to the general nonsense,
otherwise audible.

Learning that Taji had been making the tour of certain islands in
Mardi, the Begum was surprised that he could have thus hazarded his
life among the barbarians of the East. She desired to know whether his
constitution was not impaired by inhaling the unrefined atmosphere of
those remote and barbarous regions. For her part, the mere thought of
it made her faint in her innermost citadel; nor went she ever abroad
with the wind at East, dreading the contagion which might lurk in the
air.

Upon accosting the three damsels, Taji very soon discovered that the
tongue which had languished in the presence of the Begum, was now
called into active requisition, to entertain the Polysyllables, her
daughters. So assiduously were they occupied in silent endeavors to
look sentimental and pretty, that it proved no easy task to sustain
with them an ordinary chat. In this dilemma, Taji diffused not his
remarks among all three; but discreetly centered them upon O. Thinking
she might be curious concerning the sun, he made some remote allusion
to that luminary as the place of his nativity. Upon which, O inquired
where that country was, of which mention was made.

“Some distance from here; in the air above; the sun that gives light to
Pimminee, and Mardi at large.”

She replied, that if that were the case, she had never beheld it; for
such was the construction of her farthingale, that her head could not
be thrown back, without impairing its set. Wherefore, she had always
abstained from astronomical investigations.

Hereupon, rude Mohi laughed out. And that lucky laugh happily relieved
Taji from all further necessity of entertaining the Vowels. For at so
vulgar, and in Pimminee, so unwonted a sound, as a genuine laugh, the
three startled nymphs fainted away in a row, their round farthingales
falling over upon each other, like a file of empty tierces. But they
presently revived.

Meanwhile, without stirring from their mats, the polite young bucks in
the aigulettes did nothing but hold semi-transparent leaves to their
eyes, by the stems; which leaves they directed downward, toward the
disordered hems of the farthingales; in wait, perhaps, for the
revelation of an ankle, and its accompaniments. What the precise use of
these leaves could have been, it would be hard to say, especially as
the observers invariably peeped over and under them.

The calamity of the Vowels was soon followed by the breaking up of the
party; when, evening coming on, and feeling much wearied with the labor
of seeing company in Pimminee, we retired to our mats; there finding
that repose which ever awaits the fatigued.




CHAPTER XXVI.
A Reception-Day At Pimminee


Next morning, Nimni apprized us, that throughout the day he proposed
keeping open house, for the purpose of enabling us to behold whatever
of beauty, rank, and fashion, Pimminee could boast; including certain
strangers of note from various quarters of the lagoon, who doubtless
would honor themselves with a call.

As inmates of the mansion, we unexpectedly had a rare opportunity of
witnessing the final toilets of the Begum and her daughters,
preparatory to receiving their guests.

Their four farthingales were placed standing in the middle of the
dwelling; when their future inmates, arrayed in rudimental vestments,
went round and round them, attaching various articles of finery, dyed
scarfs, ivory trinkets, and other decorations. Upon the propriety of
this or that adornment, the three Vowels now and then pondered apart,
or together consulted. They talked and they laughed; they were silent
and sad; now merry at their bravery; now pensive at the thought of the
charms to be hidden.

It was O who presently suggested the expediency of an artful fold in
their draperies, by the merest accident in Mardi, to reveal a
tantalizing glimpse of their ankles, which were thought to be pretty.

But the old Begum was more active than any; by far the most
disinterested in the matter of advice. Her great object seemed to be to
pile on the finery at all hazards; and she pointed out many as yet
vacant and unappropriated spaces, highly susceptible of adornment.

At last, all was in readiness; when, taking a valedictory glance, at
their intrenchments, the Begum and damsels simultaneously dipped their
heads, directly after emerging from the summit, all ready for
execution.

And now to describe the general reception that followed. In came the
Roes, the Fees, the Lol-Lols, the Hummee-Hums, the Bidi-Bidies, and the
Dedidums; the Peenees, the Yamoyamees, the Karkies, the Fanfums, the
Diddledees, and the Fiddlefies; in a word, all the aristocracy of
Pimminee; people with exceedingly short names; and some all name, and
nothing else. It was an imposing array of sounds; a circulation of
ciphers; a marshaling of tappas; a getting together of grimaces and
furbelows; a masquerade of vapidities.

Among the crowd was a bustling somebody, one Gaddi, arrayed in much
apparel to little purpose; who, singling out Babbalanja, for some time
adhered to his side, and with excessive complaisance, enlightened him
as to the people assembled.

“_That_ is rich Marmonora, accounted a mighty man in Pimminee; his bags
of teeth included, he is said to weigh upwards of fourteen stone; and
is much sought after by tailors for his measure, being but slender in
the region of the heart. His riches are great. And that old vrow is the
widow Roo; very rich; plenty of teeth; but has none in her head. And
_this_ is Finfi; said to be not very rich, and a maid. Who would
suppose she had ever beat tappa for a living?”

And so saying, Gaddi sauntered off; his place by Babbalanja’s side
being immediately supplied by the damsel Finfi. That vivacious and
amiable nymph at once proceeded to point out the company, where Gaddi
had left off; beginning with Gaddi himself, who, she insinuated, was a
mere parvenu, a terrible infliction upon society, and not near so rich
as he was imagined to be.

Soon we were accosted by one Nonno, a sour, saturnine personage. “I
know nobody here; not a soul have I seen before; I wonder who they all
are.” And just then he was familiarly nodded to by nine worthies
abreast. Whereupon Nonno vanished. But after going the rounds of the
company, and paying court to many, he again sauntered by Babbalanja,
saying, “Nobody, nobody; nobody but nobodies; I see nobody I know.”

Advancing, Nimni now introduced many strangers of distinction, parading
their titles after a fashion, plainly signifying that he was bent upon
convincing us, that there were people present at this little affair of
his, who were men of vast reputation; and that we erred, if we deemed
him unaccustomed to the society of the illustrious.

But not a few of his magnates seemed shy of Media and their laurels.
Especially a tall robustuous fellow, with a terrible javelin in his
hand, much notched and splintered, as if it had dealt many a thrust.
His left arm was gallanted in a sling, and there was a patch upon his
sinister eye. Him Nimni made known as a famous captain, from King
Piko’s island (of which anon) who had been all but mortally wounded
somewhere, in a late desperate though nameless encounter.

“Ah,” said Media as this redoubtable withdrew, Fofi is a cunning knave;
a braggart, driven forth, by King Piko for his cowardice. He has blent
his tattooing into one mass of blue, and thus disguised, must have
palmed himself off here in Pimminee, for the man he is not. But I see
many more like him.”

“Oh ye Tapparians,” said Babbalanja, “none so easily humbugged as
humbugs. Taji: to behold this folly makes one wise. Look, look; it is
all round us. Oh Pimminee, Pimminee!”




CHAPTER XXVII.
Babbalanja Falleth Upon Pimminee Tooth And Nail


The levee over, waiving further civilities, we took courteus leave of
the Begum and Nimni, and proceeding to the beach, very soon were
embarked.

When all were pleasantly seated beneath the canopy, pipes in full
blast, calabashes revolving, and the paddlers quietly urging us along,
Media proposed that, for the benefit of the company, some one present,
in a pithy, whiffy sentence or two, should sum up the character of the
Tapparians; and ended by nominating Babbalanja to that office.

“Come, philosopher: let us see in how few syllables you can put the
brand on those Tapparians.”

“Pardon me, my lord, but you must permit me to ponder awhile; nothing
requires more time, than to be brief. An example: they say that in
conversation old Bardianna dealt in nothing but trisyllabic sentences.
His talk was thunder peals: sounding reports, but long intervals.”

“The devil take old Bardianna. And would that the grave-digger had
buried his Ponderings, along with his other remains. Can none be in
your company, Babbalanja, but you must perforce make them hob-a-nob
with that old prater? A brand for the Tapparians! that is what we
seek.”

“You shall have it, my lord. Full to the brim of themselves, for that
reason, the Tapparians are the emptiest of mortals.”

“A good blow and well planted, Babbalanja.”

“In sooth, a most excellent saying; it should be carved upon his
tombstone,” said Mohi, slowly withdrawing his pipe.

“What! would you have my epitaph read thus:—‘Here lies the emptiest of
mortals, who was full of himself?’ At best, your words are exceedingly
ambiguous, Mohi.”

“Now have I the philosopher,” cried Yoomy, with glee. “What did some
one say to me, not long since, Babbalanja, when in the matter of that
sleepy song of mine, Braid-Beard bestowed upon me an equivocal
compliment? Was I not told to wrest commendation from it, though I
tortured it to the quick?”

“Take thy own pills, philosopher,” said Mohi.

“Then would he be a great original,” said Media.

“Tell me, Yoomy,” said Babbalanja, “are you not in fault? Because I
sometimes speak wisely, you must not imagine that I should always act
so.”

“I never imagined that,” said Yoomy, “and, if I did, the truth would
belie me. It is you who are in fault, Babbalanja; not I, craving your
pardon.”

“The minstrel’s sides are all edges to-day,” said Media.

“This, then, thrice gentle Yoomy, is what I would say;” resumed
Babbalanja, “that since we philosophers bestow so much wisdom upon
others, it is not to be wondered at, if now and then we find what is
left in us too small for our necessities. It is from our very abundance
that we want.”

“And from the fool’s poverty,” said Media, “that he is opulent; for his
very simplicity, is sometimes of more account than the wisdom of the
sage. But we were discoursing of the Tapparians. Babbalanja:
sententiously you have acquitted yourself to admiration; now amplify,
and tell us more of the people of Pimminee.”

“My lord, I might amplify forever.”

“Then, my worshipful lord, let him not begin,” interposed Braid-Beard.

“I mean,” said Babbalanja, “that all subjects are inexhaustible,
however trivial; as the mathematical point, put in motion, is capable
of being produced into an infinite line.”

“But forever extending into nothing,” said Media. “A very bad example
to follow. Do you, Babbalanja, come to the point, and not travel off
with it, which is too much your wont.”

“Since my lord insists upon it then, thus much for the Tapparians,
though but a thought or two of many in reserve. They ignore the rest of
Mardi, while they themselves are but a rumor in the isles of the East;
where the business of living and dying goes on with the same
uniformity, as if there were no Tapparians in existence. They think
themselves Mardi in full; whereas, by the mass, they are stared at as
prodigies; exceptions to the law, ordaining that no Mardian shall
undertake to live, unless he set out with at least the average quantity
of brains. For these Tapparians have no brains. In lieu, they carry in
one corner of their craniums, a drop or two of attar of roses; charily
used, the supply being small. They are the victims of two incurable
maladies: stone in the heart, and ossification of the head. They are
full of fripperies, fopperies, and finesses; knowing not, that nature
should be the model of art. Yet, they might appear less silly than they
do, were they content to be the plain idiots which at bottom they are.
For there be grains of sense in a simpleton, so long as he be natural.
But what can be expected from them? They are irreclaimable Tapparians;
not so much fools by contrivance of their own, as by an express, though
inscrutable decree of Oro’s. For one, my lord, I can not abide them.”

Nor could Taji.

In Pimminee were no hilarious running and shouting: none of the royal
good cheer of old Borabolla; none of the mysteries of Maramma; none of
the sentiment and romance of Donjalolo; no rehearsing of old legends:
no singing of old songs; no life; no jolly commotion: in short, no men
and women; nothing but their integuments; stiff trains and
farthingales.




CHAPTER XXVIII.
Babbalanja Regales The Company With Some Sandwiches


It was night. But the moon was brilliant, far and near illuminating the
lagoon.

Over silvery billows we glided.

“Come Yoomy,” said Media, “moonlight and music for aye—a song! a song!
my bird of paradise.”

And folding his arms, and watching the sparkling waters, thus Yoomy
sang:—

A ray of the moon on the dancing waves
    Is the step, light step of that beautiful maid:
Mardi, with music, her footfall paves,
    And her voice, no voice, but a song in the glade.


“Hold!” cried Media, “yonder is a curious rock. It looks black as a
whale’s hump in blue water, when the sun shines.”

“That must be the Isle of Fossils,” said Mohi. “Ay, my lord, it is.”

“Let us land, then,” said Babbalanja.

And none dissenting, the canoes were put about, and presently we
debarked.

It was a dome-like surface, here and there fringed with ferns,
sprouting from clefts. But at every tide the thin soil seemed gradually
washing into the lagoon.

Like antique tablets, the smoother parts were molded in strange
devices:—Luxor marks, Tadmor ciphers, Palenque inscriptions. In long
lines, as on Denderah’s architraves, were bas-reliefs of beetles,
turtles, ant-eaters, armadilloes, guanos, serpents, tongueless
crocodiles:—a long procession, frosted and crystalized in stone, and
silvered by the moon.

“Strange sight!” cried Media. “Speak, antiquarian Mohi.”

But the chronicler was twitching his antiquarian beard, nonplussed by
these wondrous records. The cowled old father, Piaggi, bending over his
calcined Herculanean manuscripts, looked not more at fault than he.

Said Media, “Expound you, then, sage Babbalanja.” Muffling his face in
his mantle, and his voice in sepulchral tones, Babbalanja thus:—

“These are the leaves of the book of Oro. Here we read how worlds are
made; here read the rise and fall of Nature’s kingdoms. From where this
old man’s furthest histories start, these unbeginning records end.
These are the secret memoirs of times past; whose evidence, at last
divulged, gives the grim lie to Mohi’s gossipings, and makes a rattling
among the dry-bone relics of old Maramma.”

Braid-Beard’s old eyes flashed fire. With bristling beard, he cried,
“Take back the lie you send!”

“Peace! everlasting foes,” cried Media, interposing, with both arms
outstretched. “Philosopher, probe not too deep. All you say is very
fine, but very dark. I would know something more precise. But, prithee,
ghost, unmuffle! chatter no more! wait till you’re buried for that.”

“Ay, death’s cold ague will set us all shivering, my lord. We’ll swear
our teeth are icicles.”

“Will you quit driving your sleet upon us? have done expound these
rocks.”

“My lord, if you desire, I’ll turn over these stone tablets till
they’re dog-eared.”

“Heaven and Mardi!—Go on, Babbalanja.”

“’Twas thus. These were tombs burst open by volcanic throes; and hither
hurled from the lowermost vaults of the lagoon. All Mardi’s rocks are
one wide resurrection. But look. Here, now, a pretty story’s told. Ah,
little thought these grand old lords, that lived and roared before the
flood, that they would come to this. Here, King Media, look and learn.”

He looked; and saw a picture petrified, and plain as any on the
pediments of Petra.

It seemed a stately banquet of the dead, where lords in skeletons were
ranged around a board heaped up with fossil fruits, and flanked with
vitreous vases, grinning like empty skulls. There they sat, exchanging
rigid courtesies. One’s hand was on his stony heart; his other pledged
a lord who held a hollow beaker. Another sat, with earnest face beneath
a mitred brow. He seemed to whisper in the ear of one who listened
trustingly. But on the chest of him who wore the miter, an adder lay,
close-coiled in flint.

At the further end, was raised a throne, its canopy surmounted by a
crown, in which now rested the likeness of a raven on an egg.

The throne was void. But half-concealed by drapery, behind the
goodliest lord, sideway leaned a figure diademed, a lifted poniard in
its hand:—a monarch fossilized in very act of murdering his guest.

“Most high and sacred majesty!” cried Babbalanja, bowing to his feet.

While all stood gazing on this sight, there came two servitors of
Media’s, who besought of Babbalanja to settle a dispute, concerning
certain tracings upon the islet’s other side.

Thither we followed them.

Upon a long layer of the slaty stone were marks of ripplings of some
now waveless sea; mid which were tri-toed footprints of some huge
heron, or wading fowl.

Pointing to one of which, the foremost disputant thus spoke:—“I
maintain that these are three toes.”

“And I, that it is one foot,” said the other.

“And now decide between us,” joined the twain.

Said Babbalanja, starting, “Is not this the very question concerning
which they made such dire contention in Maramma, whose tertiary rocks
are chisseled all over with these marks? Yes; this it is, concerning
which they once shed blood. This it is, concerning which they still
divide.”

“Which of us is right?” again demanded the impatient twain.

“Unite, and both are right; divide, and both are wrong. Every unit is
made up of parts, as well as every plurality. Nine is three threes; a
unit is as many thirds; or, if you please, a thousand thousandths; no
special need to stop at thirds.”

“Away, ye foolish disputants!” cried Media. “Full before you is the
thing disputed.”

Strolling on, many marvels did we mark; and Media said:—“Babbalanja,
you love all mysteries; here’s a fitting theme. You have given us the
history of the rock; can your sapience tell the origin of all the
isles? how Mardi came to be?”

“Ah, that once mooted point is settled. Though hard at first, it proved
a bagatelle. Start not my lord; there are those who have measured Mardi
by perch and pole, and with their wonted lead sounded its utmost
depths. Listen: it is a pleasant story. The coral wall which
circumscribes the isles but continues upward the deep buried crater of
the primal chaos. In the first times this crucible was charged with
vapors nebulous, boiling over fires volcanic. Age by age, the fluid
thickened; dropping, at long intervals, heavy sediment to the bottom;
which layer on layer concreted, and at length, in crusts, rose toward
the surface. Then, the vast volcano burst; rent the whole mass; upthrew
the ancient rocks; which now in divers mountain tops tell tales of what
existed ere Mardi was completely fashioned. Hence many fossils on the
hills, whose kith and kin still lurk beneath the vales. Thus Nature
works, at random warring, chaos a crater, and this world a shell.”

Mohi stroked his beard.

Yoomy yawned.

Media cried, “Preposterous!”

“My lord, then take another theory—which you will—the celebrated
sandwich System. Nature’s first condition was a soup, wherein the
agglomerating solids formed granitic dumplings, which, wearing down,
deposited the primal stratum made up of series, sandwiching strange
shapes of mollusks, and zoophytes; then snails, and periwinkles:—
marmalade to sip, and nuts to crack, ere the substantials came.

“And next, my lord, we have the fine old time of the Old Red Sandstone
sandwich, clapped on the underlying layer, and among other dainties,
imbedding the first course of fish,—all quite in rule,—sturgeon- forms,
cephalaspis, glyptolepis, pterichthys; and other finny things, of
flavor rare, but hard to mouth for bones. Served up with these, were
sundry greens,—lichens, mosses, ferns, and fungi.

“Now comes the New Red Sandstone sandwich: marly and magnesious, spread
over with old patriarchs of crocodiles and alligators,—hard carving
these,—and prodigious lizards, spine-skewered, tails tied in bows, and
swimming in saffron saucers.”

“What next?” cried Media.

“The Ool, or Oily sandwich:—rare gormandizing then; for oily it was
called, because of fat old joints, and hams, and rounds, and barons of
sea-beeves and walrusses, which then crowned the stratum-board. All
piled together, glorious profusion!—fillets and briskets, rumps, and
saddles, and haunches; shoulder to shoulder, loin ’gainst sirloin, ribs
rapping knuckles, and quarter to none. And all these sandwiched right
over all that went before. Course after course, and course on course,
my lord; no time to clear the wreck; no stop nor let; lay on and slash;
cut, thrust, and come.

“Next the Chalk, or Coral sandwich; but no dry fare for that; made up
of rich side-courses,—eocene, miocene, and pliocene. The first was wild
game for the delicate,—bantam larks, curlews, quails, and flying
weazels; with a slight sprinkling of pilaus,—capons, pullets, plovers,
and garnished with petrels’ eggs. Very savory, that, my lord. The
second side-course—miocene—was out of course, flesh after fowl: marine
mammalia,—seals, grampuses, and whales, served up with sea-weed on
their flanks, hearts and kidneys deviled, and fins and flippers
friccasied. All very thee, my lord. The third side-course, the
pliocene, was goodliest of all:—whole-roasted elephants, rhinoceroses,
and hippopotamuses, stuffed with boiled ostriches, condors,
cassowaries, turkeys. Also barbacued mastodons and megatheriums,
gallantly served up with fir-trees in their mouths, and tails
cock-billed.

“Thus fared the old diluvians: arrant gormandizers and beef-bolters. We
Mardians famish on the superficial strata of deposits; cracking our
jaws on walnuts, filberts, cocoa-nuts, and clams. My lord, I’ve done.”

“And bravely done it is. Mohi tells us, that Mardi was made in six
days; but you, Babbalanja, have built it up from the bottom in less
than six minutes.”

“Nothing for us geologists, my lord. At a word we turn you out whole
systems, suns, satellites, and asteroids included. Why, my good lord,
my friend Annonimo is laying out a new Milky Way, to intersect with the
old one, and facilitate cross-cuts among the comets.”

And so saying, Babbalanja turned aside.




CHAPTER XXIX.
They Still Remain Upon The Rock


“Gogle-goggle, fugle-fi, fugle-fogle-orum,” so hummed to himself
Babbalanja, slowly pacing over the fossils. “Is he crazy again?”
whispered Yoomy.

“Are you crazy, Babbalanja?” asked Media.

“From my very birth have I been so, my lord; am I not possessed by a
devil?”

“Then I’ll e’en interrogate him,” cried Media. “—Hark ye, sirrah;— why
rave you thus in this poor mortal?”

“’Tis he, not I. I am the mildest devil that ever entered man; in
propria persona, no antlers do I wear; my tail has lost its barb, as at
last your Mardian lions lose their caudal horns.”

“A very sing-song devil this. But, prithee, who are you, sirrah?”

“The mildest devil that ever entered man; in propria persona, no
antlers do I wear; my tail has lost its barb, as at last your Mardian
lions lose their caudal horns.”

“A very iterating devil this. Sirrah! mock me not. Know you aught yet
unrevealed by Babbalanja?”

“Many things I know, not good to tell; whence they call me Azzageddi.”

“A very confidential devil, this; that tells no secrets. Azzageddi, can
I drive thee out?”

“Only with this mortal’s ghost:—together we came in, together we
depart.”

“A very terse, and ready devil, this. Whence come you, Azzageddi?”

“Whither my catechist must go—a torrid clime, cut by a hot equator.”

“A very keen, and witty devil, this. Azzageddi, whom have you there?”

“A right down merry, jolly set, that at a roaring furnace sit and toast
their hoofs for aye; so used to flames, they poke the fire with their
horns, and light their tails for torches.”

“A very funny devil, this. Azzageddi, is not Mardi a place far
pleasanter, than that from whence you came?”

“Ah, home! sweet, sweet, home! would, would that I were home again!”

“A very sentimental devil, this. Azzageddi, would you had a hand, I’d
shake it.”

“Not so with us; who, rear to rear, shake each other’s tails, and
courteously inquire, ‘Pray, worthy sir, how now stands the great
thermometer?’”

“The very prince of devils, this.”

“How mad our Babbalanja is,” cried Mohi. My lord, take heed; he’ll
bite.”

“Alas! alas!” sighed Yoomy.

“Hark ye, Babbalanja,” cried Media, “enough of this: doff your devil,
and be a man.”

“My lord, I can not doff him; but I’ll down him for a time: Azzageddi!
down, imp; down, down, down! so: now, my lord, I’m only Babbalanja.”

“Shall I test his sanity, my lord?” cried Mohi.

“Do, old man.”

“Philosopher, our great reef is surrounded by an ocean; what think you
lies beyond?”

“Alas!” sighed Yoomy, “the very subject to renew his madness.”

“Peace, minstrel!” said Media. “Answer, Babbalanja.”

“I will, my lord. Fear not, sweet Yoomy; you see how calm I am. Braid-
Beard, those strangers, that came to Mondoldo prove isles afar, as a
philosopher of old surmised, but was hooted at for his surmisings. Nor
is it at all impossible, Braid-Beard, that beyond their land may exist
other regions, of which those strangers know not; peopled with races
something like us Mardians; but perhaps with more exalted faculties,
and organs that we lack. They may have some better seeing sense than
ours; perhaps, have fins or wings for arms.”

“This seems not like sanity,” muttered Mohi.

“A most crazy hypothesis, truly,” said Media.

“And are all inductions vain?” cried Babbalanja. “Have we mortals
naught to rest on, but what we see with eyes? Is no faith to be reposed
in that inner microcosm, wherein we see the charted universe in little,
as the whole horizon is mirrored in the iris of a gnat? Alas! alas! my
lord, is there no blest Odonphi? no Astrazzi?”

“His devil’s uppermost again, my lord,” cried Braid-Beard.

“He’s stark, stark mad!” sighed Yoomy.

“Ay, the moon’s at full,” said Media. “Ho, paddlers! we depart.”




CHAPTER XXX.
Behind And Before


It was yet moonlight when we pushed from the islet. But soon, the sky
grew dun; the moon went into a cavern among the clouds; and by that
secret sympathy between our hearts and the elements, the thoughts of
all but Media became overcast.

Again discourse was had of that dark intelligence from Mondoldo,—the
fell murder of Taji’s follower.

Said Mohi, “Those specter sons of Aleema must have been the assassins.”

“They harbored deadly malice,” said Babbalanja.

“Which poor Jarl’s death must now have sated,” sighed Yoomy.

“Then all the happier for Taji,” said Media. “But away with gloom!
because the sky is clouded, why cloud your brows? Babbalanja, I grieve
the moon is gone. Yet start some paradox, that we may laugh. Say a
woman is a man, or you yourself a stork.”

At this they smiled. When hurtling came an arrow, which struck our
stern, and quivered. Another! and another! Grazing the canopy, they
darted by, and hissing, dived like red-hot bars beneath the waves.

Starting, we beheld a corruscating wake, tracking the course of a low
canoe, far flying for a neighboring mountain. The next moment it was
lost within the mountain’s shadow and pursuit was useless.

“Let us fly!” cried Yoomy

“Peace! What murderers these?” said Media, calmly; “whom can they
seek?—you, Taji?”

“The three avengers fly three bolts,” said Babbalanja. “See if the
arrow yet remain astern,” cried Media.

They brought it to him.

“By Oro! Taji on the barb!”

“Then it missed its aim. But I will not mine. And whatever arrows
follow, still will I hunt on. Nor does the ghost, that these pale
specters would avenge, at all disquiet me. The priest I slew, but to
gain her, now lost; and I would slay again, to bring her back. Ah,
Yillah! Yillah.”

All started.

Then said Babbalanja, “Aleema’s sons raved not; ’tis true, then, Taji,
that an evil deed gained you your Yillah: no wonder she is lost.”

Said Media, unconcernedly, “Perhaps better, Taji, to have kept your
secret; but tell no more; I care not to be your foe.”

“Ah, Taji! I had shrank from you,” cried Yoomy, “but for the mark upon
your brow. That undoes the tenor of your words. But look, the stars
come forth, and who are these? A waving Iris! ay, again they come:—
Hautia’s heralds!”

They brought a black thorn, buried in withered rose-balm blossoms, red
and blue.

Said Yoomy, “For that which stings, there is no cure,”

“Who, who is Hautia, that she stabs me thus?”

“And this wild sardony mocks your misery.”

“Away! ye fiends.”

“Again a Venus car; and lo! a wreath of strawberries!—Yet fly to me,
and be garlanded with joys.”

“Let the wild witch laugh. She moves me not. Neither hurtling arrows
nor Circe flowers appall.”

Said Yoomy, “They wait reply.”

“Tell your Hautia, that I know her not; nor care to know. I defy her
incantations; she lures in vain. Yillah! Yillah! still I hope!”

Slowly they departed; heeding not my cries no more to follow.

Silence, and darkness fell.




CHAPTER XXXI.
Babbalanja Discourses In The Dark


Next day came and went; and still we onward sailed. At last, by night,
there fell a calm, becalming the water of the wide lagoon, and
becalming all the clouds in heaven, wailing the constellations. But
though our sails were useless, our paddlers plied their broad stout
blades. Thus sweeping by a rent and hoar old rock, Vee-Vee, impatient
of the calm, sprang to his crow’s nest in the shark’s mouth, and
seizing his conch, sounded a blast which ran in and out among the
hollows, reverberating with the echoes.

Be sure, it was startling. But more so with respect to one of our
paddlers, upon whose shoulders, elevated Vee-Vee, his balance lost, all
at once came down by the run. But the heedless little bugler himself
was most injured by the fall; his arm nearly being broken.

Some remedies applied, and the company grown composed, Babbalanja
thus:—“My lord Media, was there any human necessity for that accident?”

“None that I know, or care to tell, Babbalanja.”

“Vee-Vee,” said Babbalanja, “did you fall on purpose?”

“Not I,” sobbed little Vee-Vee, slinging his ailing arm in its mate.

“Woe! woe to us all, then,” cried Babbalanja; “for what direful events
may be in store for us which we can not avoid.”

“How now, mortal?” cried Media; “what now?”

“My lord, think of it. Minus human inducement from without, and minus
volition from within, Vee-Vee has met with an accident, which has
almost maimed him for life. Is it not terrifying to think of? Are not
all mortals exposed to similar, nay, worse calamities, ineffably
unavoidable? Woe, woe, I say, to us Mardians! Here, take my last
breath; let me give up this beggarly ghost!”

“Nay,” said Media; “pause, Babbalanja. Turn it not adrift prematurely.
Let it house till midnight; the proper time for you mortals to
dissolve. But, philosopher, if you harp upon Vee-Vee’s mishap, know
that it was owing to nothing but his carelessness.”

“And what was that owing to, my lord?”

“To Vee-Vee himself.”

“Then, my lord, what brought such a careless being into Mardi?”

“A long course of generations. He’s some one’s great-great-grandson,
doubtless; who was great-great-grandson to some one else; who also had
grandsires.”

“Many thanks then to your highness; for you establish the doctrine of
Philosophical Necessity.”

“No. I establish nothing; I but answer your questions.”

“All one, my lord: you are a Necessitarian; in other words, you hold
that every thing takes place through absolute necessity.”

“Do you take me, then, for a fool, and a Fatalist? Pardie! a bad creed
for a monarch, the distributor of rewards and punishments.”

“Right there, my lord. But, for all that, your highness is a
Necessitarian, yet no Fatalist. Confound not the distinct. Fatalism
presumes express and irrevocable edicts of heaven concerning particular
events. Whereas, Necessity holds that all events are naturally linked,
and inevitably follow each other, without providential interposition,
though by the eternal letting of Providence.”

“Well, well, Babbalanja, I grant it all. Go on.”

“On high authority, we are told that in times past the fall of certain
nations in Mardi was prophesied of seers.”

“Most true, my lord,” said Mohi; “it is all down in the chronicles.”

“Ha! ha!” cried Media. “Go on, philosopher.”

Continued Babbalanja, “Previous to the time assigned to their
fulfillment, those prophecies were bruited through Mardi; hence,
previous to the time assigned to their fulfillment, full knowledge of
them may have come to the nations concerned. Now, my lord, was it
possible for those nations, thus forwarned, so to conduct their
affairs, as at, the prophesied time, to prove false the events revealed
to be in store for them?”

“However that may be,” said Mohi, “certain it is, those events did
assuredly come to pass:—Compare the ruins of Babbelona with book ninth,
chapter tenth, of the chronicles. Yea, yea, the owl inhabits where the
seers predicted; the jackals yell in the tombs of the kings.”

“Go on, Babbalanja,” said Media. “Of course those nations could not
have resisted their doom. Go on, then: vault over your premises.”

“If it be, then, my lord, that—”

“My very worshipful lord,” interposed Mohi, “is not our philosopher
getting off soundings; and may it not be impious to meddle with these
things?”

“Were it so, old man, he should have known it. The king of Odo is
something more than you mortals.”

“But are we the great gods themselves,” cried Yoomy, “that we discourse
of these things.”

“No, minstrel,” said Babbalanja; “and no need have the great gods to
discourse of things perfectly comprehended by them, and by themselves
ordained. But you and I, Yoomy, are men, and not gods; hence is it for
us, and not for them, to take these things for our themes. Nor is there
any impiety in the right use of our reason, whatever the issue. Smote
with superstition, shall we let it wither and die out, a dead, limb to
a live trunk, as the mad devotee’s arm held up motionless for years? Or
shall we employ it but for a paw, to help us to our bodily needs, as
the brutes use their instinct? Is not reason subtile as
quicksilver—live as lightning—a neighing charger to advance, but a
snail to recede? Can we starve that noble instinct in us, and hope that
it will survive? Better slay the body than the soul; and if it be the
direst of sins to be the murderers of our own bodies, how much more to
be a soul-suicide. Yoomy, we are men, we are angels. And in his
faculties, high Oro is but what a man would be, infinitely magnified.
Let us aspire to all things. Are we babes in the woods, to be scared by
the shadows of the trees? What shall appall us? If eagles gaze at the
sun, may not men at the gods?”

“For one,” said Media, “you may gaze at me freely. Gaze on. But talk
not of my kinsmen so fluently, Babbalanja. Return to your argument.”

“I go back then, my lord. By implication, you have granted, that in
times past the future was foreknown of Oro; hence, in times past, the
future must have been foreordained. But in all things Oro is immutable.
Wherefore our own future is foreknown and foreordained. Now, if things
foreordained concerning nations have in times past been revealed to
them previous to their taking place, then something similar may be
presumable concerning individual men now living. That is to say, out of
all the events destined to befall any one man, it is not impossible
that previous knowledge of some one of these events might
supernaturally come to him. Say, then, it is revealed to me, that ten
days hence I shall, of my own choice, fall upon my javelin; when the
time comes round, could I refrain from suicide? Grant the strongest
presumable motives to the act; grant that, unforewarned, I would slay
myself outright at the time appointed: yet, foretold of it, and
resolved to test the decree to the uttermost, under such circumstances,
I say, would it be possible for me not to kill myself? If possible,
then predestination is not a thing absolute; and Heaven is wise to keep
secret from us those decrees, whose virtue consists in secrecy. But if
not possible, then that suicide would not be mine, but Oro’s. And, by
consequence, not only that act, but all my acts, are Oro’s. In sum, my
lord, he who believes that in times past, prophets have prophesied, and
their prophecies have been fulfilled; when put to it, inevitably must
allow that every man now living is an irresponsible being.”

“In sooth, a very fine argument very finely argued,” said Media. “You
have done marvels, Babbalanja. But hark ye, were I so disposed, I could
deny you all over, premises and conclusions alike. And furthermore, my
cogent philosopher, had you published that anarchical dogma among my
subjects in Oro, I had silenced you by my spear-headed scepter, instead
of my uplifted finger.”

“Then, all thanks and all honor to your generosity, my lord, in
granting us the immunities you did at the outset of this voyage. But,
my lord, permit me one word more. Is not Oro omnipresent—absolutely
every where?”

“So you mortals teach, Babbalanja.”

“But so do they _mean_, my lord. Often do we Mardians stick to terms
for ages, yet truly apply not their meanings.”

“Well, Oro is every where. What now?”

“Then, if that be absolutely so, Oro is not merely a universal
on-looker, but occupies and fills all space; and no vacancy is left for
any being, or any thing but Oro. Hence, Oro is _in_ all things, and
himself _is_ all things—the time-old creed. But since evil abounds, and
Oro is all things, then he can not be perfectly good; wherefore, Oro’s
omnipresence and moral perfection seem incompatible. Furthermore, my
lord those orthodox systems which ascribe to Oro almighty and universal
attributes every way, those systems, I say, destroy all intellectual
individualities but Oro, and resolve the universe into him. But this is
a heresy; wherefore, orthodoxy and heresy are one. And thus is it, my
lord, that upon these matters we Mardians all agree and disagree
together, and kill each other with weapons that burst in our hands. Ah,
my lord, with what mind must blessed Oro look down upon this scene!
Think you he discriminates between the deist and atheist? Nay; for the
Searcher of the cores of all hearts well knoweth that atheists there
are none. For in things abstract, men but differ in the sounds that
come from their mouths, and not in the wordless thoughts lying at the
bottom of their beings. The universe is all of one mind. Though my
twin-brother sware to me, by the blazing sun in heaven at noon-day,
that Oro is not; yet would he belie the thing he intended to express.
And who lives that blasphemes? What jargon of human sounds so puissant
as to insult the unutterable majesty divine? Is Oro’s honor in the
keeping of Mardi?— Oro’s conscience in man’s hands? Where our warrant,
with Oro’s sign-manual, to justify the killing, burning, and
destroying, or far worse, the social persecutions we institute in his
behalf? Ah! how shall these self-assumed attorneys and vicegerents be
astounded, when they shall see all heaven peopled with heretics and
heathens, and all hell nodding over with miters! Ah! let us Mardians
quit this insanity. Let us be content with the theology in the grass
and the flower, in seed-time and harvest. Be it enough for us to know
that Oro indubitably is. My lord! my lord! sick with the spectacle of
the madness of men, and broken with spontaneous doubts, I sometimes see
but two things in all Mardi to believe:—that I myself exist, and that I
can most happily, or least miserably exist, by the practice of
righteousness. All else is in the clouds; and naught else may I learn,
till the firmament be split from horizon to horizon. Yet, alas! too
often do I swing from these moorings.”

“Alas! his fit is coming upon him again,” whispered Yoomy.

“Why, Babbalanja,” said Media, “I almost pity you. You are too warm,
too warm. Why fever your soul with these things? To no use you mortals
wax earnest. No thanks, but curses, will you get for your earnestness.
You yourself you harm most. Why not take creeds as they come? It is not
so hard to be persuaded; never mind about believing.”

“True, my lord; not very hard; no act is required; only passiveness.
Stand still and receive. Faith is to the thoughtless, doubts to the
thinker.”

“Then, why think at all? Is it not better for you mortals to clutch
error as in a vice, than have your fingers meet in your hand? And to
what end your eternal inquisitions? You have nothing to substitute. You
say all is a lie; then out with the truth. Philosopher, your devil is
but a foolish one, after all. I, a demi-god, never say nay to these
things.”

“Yea, my lord, it would hardly answer for Oro himself, were he to come
down to Mardi, to deny men’s theories concerning him. Did they not
strike at the rash deity in Alma?”

“Then, why deny those theories yourself? Babbalanja, you almost affect
my immortal serenity. Must you forever be a sieve for good grain to run
through, while you retain but the chaff? Your tongue is forked. You
speak two languages: flat folly for yourself, and wisdom for others.
Babbalanja, if you have any belief of your own, keep it; but, in Oro’s
name, keep it secret.”

“Ay, my lord, in these things wise men are spectators, not actors; wise
men look on, and say ‘ay.’”

“Why not say so yourself, then?”

“My lord, because I have often told you, that I am a fool, and not
wise.”

“Your Highness,” said Mohi, “this whole discourse seems to have grown
out of the subject of Necessity and Free Will. Now, when a boy, I
recollect hearing a sage say, that these things were reconcilable.”

“Ay?” said Media, “what say you to that, now, Babbalanja?”

“It may be even so, my lord. Shall I tell you a story?”

“Azzageddi’s stirring now,” muttered Mohi.

“Proceed,” said Media.

“King Normo had a fool, called Willi, whom he loved to humor. Now,
though Willi ever obeyed his lord, by the very instinct of his
servitude, he flattered himself that he was free; and this conceit it
was, that made the fool so entertaining to the king. One day, said
Normo to his fool,—‘Go, Willi, to yonder tree, and wait there till I
come,’ ‘Your Majesty, I will,’ said Willi, bowing beneath his jingling
bells; ‘but I presume your Majesty has no objections to my walking on
my hands:—I am free, I hope.’ ‘Perfectly,’ said Normo, ‘hands or feet,
it’s all the same to me; only do my bidding.’ ‘I thought as much,’ said
Willi; so, swinging his limber legs into the air, Willi, thumb after
thumb, essayed progression. But soon, his bottled blood so rushed
downward through his neck, that he was fain to turn a somerset and
regain his feet. Said he, ‘Though I am free to do it, it’s not so easy
turning digits into toes; I’ll walk, by gad! which is my other option.’
So he went straight forward, and did King Normo’s bidding in the
natural way.”

“A curious story that,” said Media; “whence came it?”

“My lord, where every thing, but one, is to be had:—within.”

“You are charged to the muzzle, then,” said Braid-Beard. “Yes, Mohi;
and my talk is my overflowing, not my fullness.”

“And what may you be so full of?”

“Of myself.”

“So it seems,” said Mohi, whisking away a fly with his beard.

“Babbalanja,” said Media, “you did right in selecting this ebon night
for discussing the theme you did; and truly, you mortals are but too
apt to talk in the dark.”

“Ay, my lord, and we mortals may prate still more in the dark, when we
are dead; for methinks, that if we then prate at all, ’twill be in our
sleep. Ah! my lord, think not that in aught I’ve said this night, I
would assert any wisdom of my own. I but fight against the armed and
crested Lies of Mardi, that like a host, assail me. I am stuck full of
darts; but, tearing them from out me, gasping, I discharge them whence
they come.”

So saying, Babbalanja slowly drooped, and fell reclining; then lay
motionless as the marble Gladiator, that for centuries has been dying.




CHAPTER XXXII.
My Lord Media Summons Mohi To The Stand


While slowly the night wore on, and the now scudding clouds flown past,
revealed again the hosts in heaven, few words were uttered save by
Media; who, when all others were most sad and silent, seemed but little
moved, or not stirred a jot.

But that night, he filled his flagon fuller than his wont, and drank,
and drank, and pledged the stars.

“Here’s to thee, old Arcturus! To thee, old Aldebaran! who ever poise
your wine-red, fiery spheres on high. A health to _thee_, my regal
friend, Alphacca, in the constellation of the Crown: Lo! crown to
crown, I pledge thee! I drink to _ye_, too, Alphard! Markab! Denebola!
Capella!—to _ye_, too, sailing Cygnus! Aquila soaring!—All round, a
health to all your diadems! May they never fade! nor mine!”

At last, in the shadowy east, the Dawn, like a gray, distant sail
before the wind, was descried; drawing nearer and nearer, till her
gilded prow was perceived.

And as in tropic gales, the winds blow fierce, and more fierce, with
the advent of the sun; so with King Media; whose mirth now breezed up
afresh. But, as at sunrise, the sea-storm only blows harder, to settle
down at last into a steady wind; even so, in good time, my lord Media
came to be more decorous of mood. And Babbalanja abated his reveries.

For who might withstand such a morn!

As on the night-banks of the far-rolling Ganges, the royal bridegroom
sets forth for his bride, preceded by nymphs, now this side, now that,
lighting up all the flowery flambeaux held on high as they pass; so
came the Sun, to his nuptials with Mardi:—the Hours going on before,
touching all the peaks, till they glowed rosy-red.

By reflex, the lagoon, here and there, seemed on fire; each curling
wave-crest a flame.

Noon came as we sailed.

And now, citrons and bananas, cups and calabashes, calumets and
tobacco, were passed round; and we were all very merry and mellow
indeed. Smacking our lips, chatting, smoking, and sipping. Now a
mouthful of citron to season a repartee; now a swallow of wine to wash
down a precept; now a fragrant whiff to puff away care. Many things did
beguile. From side to side, we turned and grazed, like Juno’s white
oxen in clover meads.

Soon, we drew nigh to a charming cliff, overrun with woodbines, on high
suspended from flowering Tamarisk and Tamarind-trees. The blossoms of
the Tamarisks, in spikes of small, red bells; the Tamarinds,
wide-spreading their golden petals, red-streaked as with streaks of the
dawn. Down sweeping to the water, the vines trailed over to the crisp,
curling waves,—little pages, all eager to hold up their trains.

Within, was a bower; going behind it, like standing inside the sheet of
the falls of the Genesee.

In this arbor we anchored. And with their shaded prows thrust in among
the flowers, our three canoes seemed baiting by the way, like wearied
steeds in a hawthorn lane.

High midsummer noon is more silent than night. Most sweet a siesta
then. And noon dreams are day-dreams indeed; born under the meridian
sun. Pale Cynthia begets pale specter shapes; and her frigid rays best
illuminate white nuns, marble monuments, icy glaciers, and cold tombs.

The sun rolled on. And starting to his feet, arms clasped, and wildly
staring, Yoomy exclaimed—“Nay, nay, thou shalt not depart, thou
maid!—here, here I fold thee for aye!—Flown?—A dream! Then siestas
henceforth while I live. And at noon, every day will I meet thee, sweet
maid! And, oh Sun! set not; and poppies bend over us, when next we
embrace!”

“What ails that somnambulist?” cried Media, rising. “Yoomy, I say! what
ails thee?”

“He must have indulged over freely in those citrons,” said Mohi,
sympathetically rubbing his fruitery. “Ho, Yoomy! a swallow of brine
will help thee.”

“Alas,” cried Babbalanja, “do the fairies then wait on repletion? Do
our dreams come from below, and not from the skies? Are we angels, or
dogs? Oh, Man, Man, Man! thou art harder to solve, than the Integral
Calculus—yet plain as a primer; harder to find than the
philosopher’s-stone—yet ever at hand; a more cunning compound, than an
alchemist’s—yet a hundred weight of flesh, to a penny weight of spirit;
soul and body glued together, firm as atom to atom, seamless as the
vestment without joint, warp or woof—yet divided as by a river, spirit
from flesh; growing both ways, like a tree, and dropping thy topmost
branches to earth, like thy beard or a banian!—I give thee up, oh Man!
thou art twain—yet indivisible; all things—yet a poor unit at best.”

“Philosopher you seem puzzled to account for the riddles of your race,”
cried Media, sideways reclining at his ease. “Now, do thou, old Mohi,
stand up before a demi-god, and answer for all.—Draw nigh, so I can eye
thee. What art thou, mortal?”

“My worshipful lord, a man.”

“And what are men?”

“My lord, before thee is a specimen.”

“I fear me, my lord will get nothing out of that witness,” said
Babbalanja. “Pray you, King Media, let another inquisitor cross-
question.”

“Proceed; take the divan.”

“A pace or two farther off, there, Mohi; so I can garner thee all in at
a glance.—Attention! Rememberest thou, fellow-being, when thou wast
born?”

“Not I. Old Braid-Beard had no memory then.”

“When, then, wast thou first conscious of being?”

“What time I was teething: my first sensation was an ache.”

“What dost thou, fellow-being, here in Mardi?”

“What doth Mardi here, fellow-being, under me?”

“Philosopher, thou gainest but little by thy questions,” cried Yoomy
advancing. “Let a poet endeavor.”

“I abdicate in your favor, then, gentle Yoomy; let me smooth the divan
for you;—there: be seated.”

“Now, Mohi, who art thou?” said Yoomy, nodding his bird-of-paradise
plume.

“The sole witness, it seems, in this case.”

“Try again minstrel,” cried Babbalanja.

“Then, what art thou, Mohi?”

“Even what thou art, Yoomy.”

“He is too sharp or too blunt for us all,” cried King Media. “His devil
is even more subtle than yours, Babbalanja. Let him go.”

“Shall I adjourn the court then, my lord?” said Babbalanja.

“Ay.”

“Oyez! Oyez! Oyez! All mortals having business at this court, know ye,
that it is adjourned till sundown of the day, which hath no to-morrow.”




CHAPTER XXXIII.
Wherein Babbalanja And Yoomy Embrace


“How the isles grow and multiply around us!” cried Babbalanja, as
turning the bold promontory of an uninhabited shore, many distant lands
bluely loomed into view. “Surely, our brief voyage, may not embrace all
Mardi like its reef?”

“No,” said Media, “much must be left unseen. Nor every where can Yillah
be sought, noble Taji.”

Said Yoomy, “We are as birds, with pinions clipped, that in
unfathomable and endless woods, but flit from twig to twig of one poor
tree.”

“More isles! more isles!” cried Babbalanja, erect, and gazing abroad.
“And lo! round all is heaving that infinite ocean. Ah! gods! what
regions lie beyond?”

“But whither now?” he cried, as in obedience to Media, the paddlers
suddenly altered our course.

“To the bold shores of Diranda,” said Media.

“Ay; the land of clubs and javelins, where the lord seigniors Hello and
Piko celebrate their famous games,” cried Mohi.

“Your clubs and javelins,” said Media, “remind me of the great battle-
chant of Narvi—Yoomy!”—turning to the minstrel, gazing abstractedly
into the water;—“awake, Yoomy, and give us the lines.”

“My lord Media, ’tis but a rude, clanging thing; dissonant as if the
north wind blew through it. Methinks the company will not fancy lines
so inharmonious. Better sing you, perhaps, one of my sonnets.”

“Better sit and sob in our ears, silly Yoomy that thou art!—no! no!
none of your sentiment now; my soul is martially inclined; I want
clarion peals, not lute warblings. So throw out your chest, Yoomy: lift
high your voice; and blow me the old battle-blast.—Begin, sir
minstrel.”

And warning all, that he himself had not composed the odious chant,
Yoomy thus:—

Our clubs! our clubs!
The thousand clubs of Narvi!
Of the living trunk of the Palm-tree made;
Skull breakers! Brain spatterers!
Wielded right, and wielded left;
Life quenchers! Death dealers!
Causing live bodies to run headless!

Our bows! our bows!
The thousand bows of Narvi!
Ribs of Tara, god of War!
Fashioned from the light Tola their arrows;
Swift messengers! Heart piercers!
Barbed with sharp pearl shells;
Winged with white tail-plumes;
To wild death-chants, strung with the hair of wild maidens!

Our spears! our spears!
The thousand spears of Narvi!
Of the thunder-riven Moo-tree made
Tall tree, couched on the long mountain Lana!
No staves for gray-beards! no rods for fishermen!
Tempered by fierce sea-winds,
Splintered into lances by lightnings,
Long arrows! Heart seekers!
Toughened by fire their sharp black points!

Our slings! our slings!
The thousand slings of Narvi!
All tasseled, and braided, and gayly bedecked.
In peace, our girdles; in war, our war-nets;
Wherewith catch we heads as fish from the deep!
The pebbles they hurl, have been hurled before,—
Hurled up on the beach by the stormy sea!
Pebbles, buried erewhile in the head of the shark:
To be buried erelong in the heads of our foes!
Home of hard blows, our pouches!
Nest of death-eggs!  How quickly they hatch!

Uplift, and couch we our spears, men!
Ring hollow on the rocks our war clubs!
Bend we our bows, feel the points of our arrows:
Aloft, whirl in eddies our sling-nets;
To the fight, men of Narvi!
Sons of battle! Hunters of men!
Raise high your war-wood!
Shout Narvi! her groves in the storm!


“By Oro!” cried Media, “but Yoomy has well nigh stirred up all
Babbalanja’s devils in me. Were I a mortal, I could fight now on a
pretense. And did any man say me nay, I would charge upon him like a
spear-point. Ah, Yoomy, thou and thy tribe have much to answer for; ye
stir up all Mardi with your lays. Your war chants make men fight; your
drinking songs, drunkards; your love ditties, fools. Yet there thou
sittest, Yoomy, gentle as a dove.—What art thou, minstrel, that thy
soft, singing soul should so master all mortals? Yoomy, like me, you
sway a scepter.”

“Thou honorest my calling overmuch,” said Yoomy, we minstrels but sing
our lays carelessly, my lord Media.”

“Ay: and the more mischief they make.”

“But sometimes we poets are didactic.”

“Didactic and dull; many of ye are but too apt to be prosy unless
mischievous.”

“Yet in our verses, my lord Media, but few of us purpose harm.”

“But when all harmless to yourselves, ye may be otherwise to Mardi.”

“And are not foul streams often traced to pure fountains, my lord?”
said Babbalanja. “The essence of all good and all evil is in us, not
out of us. Neither poison nor honey lodgeth in the flowers on which,
side by side, bees and wasps oft alight. My lord, nature is an
immaculate virgin, forever standing unrobed before us. True poets but
paint the charms which all eyes behold. The vicious would be vicious
without them.”

“My lord Media,” impetuously resumed Yoomy, “I am sensible of a
thousand sweet, merry fancies, limpid with innocence; yet my enemies
account them all lewd conceits.”

“There be those in Mardi,” said Babbalanja, “who would never ascribe
evil to others, did they not find it in their own hearts; believing
none can be different from themselves.”

“My lord, my lord!” cried Yoomy. “The air that breathes my music from
me is a mountain air! Purer than others am I; for though not a woman, I
feel in me a woman’s soul.”

“Ah, have done, silly Yoomy,” said Media. “Thou art becoming flighty,
even as Babbalanja, when Azzageddi is uppermost.”

“Thus ever: ever thus!” sighed Yoomy. “They comprehend us not.”

“Nor me,” said Babbalanja. “Yoomy: poets both, we differ but in
seeming; thy airiest conceits are as the shadows of my deepest
ponderings; though Yoomy soars, and Babbalanja dives, both meet at
last. Not a song you sing, but I have thought its thought; and where
dull Mardi sees but your rose, I unfold its petals, and disclose a
pearl. Poets are we, Yoomy, in that we dwell without us; we live in
grottoes, palms, and brooks; we ride the sea, we ride the sky; poets
are omnipresent.”




CHAPTER XXXIV.
Of The Isle Of Diranda


In good time the shores of Diranda were in sight. And, introductory to
landing, Braid-Beard proceeded to give us some little account of the
island, and its rulers.

As previously hinted, those very magnificent and illustrious lord
seigniors, the lord seigniors Hello and Piko, who between them divided
Diranda, delighted in all manner of public games, especially warlike
ones; which last were celebrated so frequently, and were so fatal in
their results, that, not-withstanding the multiplicity of nuptials
taking place in the isle, its population remained in equilibrio. But,
strange to relate, this was the very object which the lord seigniors
had in view; the very object they sought to compass, by instituting
their games. Though, for the most part, they wisely kept the secret
locked up.

But to tell how the lord seigniors Hello and Piko came to join hands in
this matter.

Diranda had been amicably divided between them ever since the day they
were crowned; one reigning king in the East, the other in the West. But
King Piko had been long harassed with the thought, that the
unobstructed and indefinite increase of his browsing subjects might
eventually denude of herbage his portion of the island. Posterity,
thought he, is marshaling her generations in squadrons, brigades, and
battalions, and ere long will be down upon my devoted empire. Lo! her
locust cavalry darken the skies; her light-troop pismires cover the
earth. Alas! my son and successor, thou wilt inhale choke-damp for air,
and have not a private corner to say thy prayers.

By a sort of arithmetical progression, the probability, nay, the
certainty of these results, if not in some way averted, was proved to
King Piko; and he was furthermore admonished, that war—war to the haft
with King Hello—was the only cure for so menacing an evil.

But so it was, that King Piko, at peace with King Hello, and well
content with, the tranquillity of the times, little relished the idea
of picking a quarrel with his neighbor, and running its risks, in order
to phlebotomize his redundant population.

“Patience, most illustrious seignior,” said another of his sagacious
Ahithophels, “and haply a pestilence may decimate the people.”

But no pestilence came. And in every direction the young men and
maidens were recklessly rushing into wedlock; and so salubrious the
climate, that the old men stuck to the outside of the turf, and refused
to go under.

At last some Machiavel of a philosopher suggested, that peradventure
the object of war might be answered without going to war; that
peradventure King Hello might be brought to acquiesce in an
arrangement, whereby the men of Diranda might be induced to kill off
one another voluntarily, in a peaceable manner, without troubling their
rulers. And to this end, the games before mentioned were proposed.

“Egad! my wise ones, you have hit it,” cried Piko; “but will Hello say
ay?”

“Try him, most illustrious seignior,” said Machiavel.

So to Hello went embassadors ordinary and extraordinary, and ministers
plenipotentiary and peculiar; and anxiously King Piko awaited their
return.

The mission was crowned with success.

Said King Hello to the ministers, in confidence:—“The very thing, Dons,
the very thing I have wanted. My people are increasing too fast. They
keep up the succession too well. Tell your illustrious master it’s a
bargain. The games! the games! by all means.”

So, throughout the island, by proclamation, they were forthwith
established; succeeding to a charm.

And the lord seigniors, Hello and Piko, finding their interests the
same, came together like bride and bridegroom; lived in the same
palace; dined off the same cloth; cut from the same bread-fruit; drank
from the same calabash; wore each other’s crowns; and often locking
arms with a charming frankness, paced up and down in their dominions,
discussing the prospect of the next harvest of heads.

In his old-fashioned way, having related all this, with many other
particulars, Mohi was interrupted by Babbalanja, who inquired how the
people of Diranda relished the games, and how they fancied being coolly
thinned out in that manner.

To which in substance the chronicler replied, that of the true object
of the games, they had not the faintest conception; but hammered away
at each other, and fought and died together, like jolly good fellows.

“Right again, immortal old Bardianna!” cried Babbalanja.

“And what has the sage to the point this time?” asked Media.

“Why, my lord, in his chapter on “Cracked Crowns,” Bardianna, after
many profound ponderings, thus concludes: In this cracked sphere we
live in, then, cracked skulls would seem the inevitable allotments of
many. Nor will the splintering thereof cease, till this pugnacious
animal we treat of be deprived of his natural maces: videlicet, his
arms. And right well doth man love to bruise and batter all occiputs in
his vicinity.”

“Seems to me, our old friend must have been on his stilts that time,”
interrupted Mohi.

“No, Braid-Beard. But by way of apologizing for the unusual rigidity of
his style in that chapter, he says in a note, that it was written upon
a straight-backed settle, when he was ill of a lumbago, and a crick in
the neck.”

“That incorrigible Azzageddi again,” said Media, “Proceed with your
quotation, Babbalanja.”

“Where was I, Braid-Beard?”

“Battering occiputs at the last accounts,” said Mohi.

“Ah, yes. And right well doth man love to bruise and batter all
occiputs in his vicinity; he but follows his instincts; he is but one
member of a fighting world. Spiders, vixens, and tigers all war with a
relish; and on every side is heard the howls of hyenas, the throttlings
of mastiffs, the din of belligerant beetles, the buzzing warfare of the
insect battalions: and the shrill cries of lady Tartars rending their
lords. And all this existeth of necessity. To war it is, and other
depopulators, that we are beholden for elbow-room in Mardi and for all
our parks an gardens, wherein we are wont to expatiate. Come on, then,
plague, war, famine and viragos! Come on, I say, for who shall stay ye?
Come on, and healthfulize the census! And more especially, oh War! do
thou march forth with thy bludgeon! Cracked are, our crowns by nature,
and henceforth forever, cracked shall they be by hard raps.”

“And hopelessly cracked the skull, that hatched such a tirade of
nonsense,” said Mohi.

“And think you not, old Bardianna knew that?” asked Babbalanja. “He
wrote an excellent chapter on that very subject.”

“What, on the cracks in his own pate?”

“Precisely. And expressly asserts, that to those identical cracks, was
he indebted for what little light he had in his brain.”

“I yield, Babbalanja; your old Ponderer is older than I.”

“Ay, ay, Braid-Beard; his crest was a tortoise; and this was the
motto:—‘I bite, but am not to be bitten.’”




CHAPTER XXXV.
They Visit The Lords Piko And Hello


In good time, we landed at Diranda. And that landing was like landing
at Greenwich among the Waterloo pensioners. The people were docked
right and left; some without arms; some without legs; not one with a
tail; but to a man, all had heads, though rather the worse for wear;
covered with lumps and contusions.

Now, those very magnificent and illustrious lord seigniors, the lord
seigniors Hello and Piko, lived in a palace, round which was a fence of
the cane called Malacca, each picket helmed with a skull, of which
there were fifty, one to each cane. Over the door was the blended arms
of the high and mighty houses of Hello and Piko: a Clavicle crossed
over an Ulna.

Escorted to the sign of the Skull-and-Cross-Bones, we received the very
best entertainment which that royal inn could afford. We found our
hosts Hello and Piko seated together on a dais or throne, and now and
then drinking some claret-red wine from an ivory bowl, too large to
have been wrought from an elephant’s tusk. They were in glorious good
spirits, shaking ivory coins in a skull.

“What says your majesty?” said Piko. “Heads or tails?”

“Oh, heads, your majesty,” said Hello.

“And heads say I,” said Piko.

And heads it was. But it was heads on both sides, so both were sure to
win.

And thus they were used to play merrily all day long; beheading the
gourds of claret by one slicing blow with their sickle-shaped scepters.
Wide round them lay empty calabashes, all feathered, red dyed, and
betasseled, trickling red wine from their necks, like the decapitated
pullets in the old baronial barn yard at Kenilworth, the night before
Queen Bess dined with my lord Leicester.

The first compliments over; and Media and Taji having met with a
reception suitable to their rank, the kings inquired, whether there
were any good javelin-flingers among us: for if that were the case,
they could furnish them plenty of sport. Informed, however, that none
of the party were professional warriors, their majesties looked rather
glum, and by way of chasing away the blues, called for some good old
stuff, that was red.

It seems, this soliciting guests, to keep their spears from decaying,
by cut and thrust play with their subjects, was a very common thing
with their illustrious majesties.

But if their visitors could not be prevailed upon to spear a subject or
so, our hospitable hosts resolved to have a few speared, and otherwise
served up for our special entertainment. In a word, our arrival
furnished a fine pretext for renewing their games; though, we learned,
that only ten days previous, upward of fifty combatants had been slain
at one of these festivals.

Be that as it might, their joint majesties determined upon another one;
and also upon our tarrying to behold it. We objected, saying we must
depart.

But we were kindly assured, that our canoes had been dragged out of the
water, and buried in a wood; there to remain till the games were over.

The day fixed upon, was the third subsequent to our arrival; the
interval being devoted to preparations; summoning from their villages
and valleys the warriors of the land; and publishing the royal
proclamations, whereby the unbounded hospitality of the kings’
household was freely offered to all heroes whatsoever, who for the love
of arms, and the honor of broken heads, desired to cross battle-clubs,
hurl spears, or die game in the royal valley of Deddo.

Meantime, the whole island was in a state of uproarious commotion, and
strangers were daily arriving.

The spot set apart for the festival, was a spacious down, mantled with
white asters; which, waving in windrows, lay upon the land, like the
cream-surf surging the milk of young heifers. But that whiteness, here
and there, was spotted with strawberries; tracking the plain, as if
wounded creatures had been dragging themselves bleeding from some
deadly encounter. All round the down, waved scarlet thickets of sumach,
moaning in the wind, like the gory ghosts environing Pharsalia the
night after the battle; scaring away the peasants, who with
bushel-baskets came to the jewel-harvest of the rings of Pompey’s
knights.

Beneath the heaped turf of this down, lay thousands of glorious corpses
of anonymous heroes, who here had died glorious deaths.

Whence, in the florid language of Diranda, they called this field “The
Field of Glory.”




CHAPTER XXXVI.
They Attend The Games


At last the third day dawned; and facing us upon entering the plain,
was a throne of red log-wood, canopied by the foliage of a red-dyed
Pandannus. Upon this throne, purple-robed, reclined those very
magnificent and illustrious lords seigniors, the lord seigniors Hello
and Piko. Before them, were many gourds of wine; and crosswise, staked
in the sod, their own royal spears.

In the middle of the down, as if by a furrow, a long, oval space was
margined of about which, a crowd of spectators were seated. Opposite
the throne, was reserved a clear passage to the arena, defined by
air-lines, indefinitely produced from the leveled points of two spears,
so poised by a brace of warriors.

Drawing near, our party was courteously received, and assigned a
commodious lounge.

The first encounter was a club-fight between two warriors. Nor casque
of steel, nor skull of Congo could have resisted their blows, had they
fallen upon the mark; for they seemed bent upon driving each other, as
stakes, into the earth. Presently, one of them faltered; but his
adversary rushing in to cleave him down, slipped against a guavarind;
when the falterer, with one lucky blow, high into the air sent the
stumbler’s club, which descended upon the crown of a spectator, who was
borne from the plain.

“All one,” muttered Pike.

“As good dead as another,” muttered Hello.

The second encounter was a hugging-match; wherein two warriors, masked
in Grisly-bear skins, hugged each other to death.

The third encounter was a bumping-match between a fat warrior and a
dwarf. Standing erect, his paunch like a bass-drum before a drummer,
the fat man was run at, head-a-tilt by the dwarf, and sent spinning
round on his axis.

The fourth encounter was a tussle between two-score warriors, who all
in a mass, writhed like the limbs in Sebastioni’s painting of Hades.
After obscuring themselves in a cloud of dust, these combatants,
uninjured, but hugely blowing, drew off; and separately going among the
spectators, rehearsed their experience of the fray.

“Braggarts!” mumbled Piko.

“Poltroons!” growled Hello.

While the crowd were applauding, a sober-sided observer, trying to rub
the dust out of his eyes, inquired of an enthusiastic neighbor, “Pray,
what was all that about?”

“Fool! saw you not the dust?”

“That I did,” said Sober-Sides, again rubbing his eyes, “But I can
raise a dust myself.”

The fifth encounter was a fight of single sticks between one hundred
warriors, fifty on a side.

In a line, the first fifty emerged from the sumachs, their weapons
interlocked in a sort of wicker-work. In advance marched a priest,
bearing an idol with a cracked cocoanut for a head,—Krako, the god of
Trepans. Preceded by damsels flinging flowers, now came on the second
fifty, gayly appareled, weapons poised, and their feet nimbly moving in
a martial measure.

Midway meeting, both parties touched poles, then retreated. Very
courteous, this; but tantamount to bowing each other out of Mardi; for
upon Pike’s tossing a javelin, they rushed in, and each striking his
man, all fell to the ground.

“Well done!” cried Piko.

“Brave fellows!” cried Hello.

“But up and at it again, my heroes!” joined both. “Lo! we kings look
on, and there stand the bards!”

These bards were a row of lean, sallow, old men, in thread-bare robes,
and chaplets of dead leaves.

“Strike up!” cried Piko.

“A stave!” cried Hello.

Whereupon, the old croakers, each with a quinsy, sang thus in cracked
strains:—

Quack! Quack! Quack!
With a toorooloo whack;
Hack away, merry men, hack away.
Who would not die brave,
His ear smote by a stave?
Thwack away, merry men, thwack away!
’Tis glory that calls,
To each hero that falls,
Hack away, merry men, hack away!
Quack! Quack! Quack!
Quack! Quack!
Quack!


Thus it tapered away.

“Ha, ha!” cried Piko, “how they prick their ears at that!”

“Hark ye, my invincibles!” cried Hello. “That pean is for the slain. So
all ye who have lives left, spring to it! Die and be glorified! Now’s
the time!—Strike up again, my ducklings!”

Thus incited, the survivors staggered to their feet; and hammering away
at each others’ sconces, till they rung like a chime of bells going off
with a triple-bob-major, they finally succeeded in immortalizing
themselves by quenching their mortalities all round; the bards still
singing.

“Never mind your music now,” cried Piko.

“It’s all over,” said Hello.

“What valiant fellows we have for subjects,” cried Piko.

“Ho! grave-diggers, clear the field,” cried Hello.

“Who else is for glory?” cried Piko.

“There stand the bards!” cried Hello.

But now there rushed among the crowd a haggard figure, trickling with
blood, and wearing a robe, whose edges were burned and blacked by fire.
Wielding a club, it ran to and fro, with loud yells menacing all.

A noted warrior this; who, distracted at the death of five sons slain
in recent games, wandered from valley to valley, wrestling and
fighting.

With wild cries of “The Despairer! The Despairer!” the appalled
multitude fled; leaving the two kings frozen on their throne, quaking
and quailing, their teeth rattling like dice.

The Despairer strode toward them; when, recovering their senses, they
ran; for a time pursued through the woods by the phantom.




CHAPTER XXXVII.
Taji Still Hunted, And Beckoned


Previous to the kings’ flight, we had plunged into the neighboring
woods; and from thence emerging, entered brakes of cane, sprouting from
morasses. Soon we heard a whirring, as if three startled partridges had
taken wing; it proved three feathered arrows, from three unseen hands.

Gracing us, two buried in the ground, but from Taji’s arm, the third
drew blood.

On all sides round we turned; but none were seen. “Still the avengers
follow,” said Babbalanja.

“Lo! the damsels three!” cried Yoomy. “Look where they come!”

We joined them by the sumach-wood’s red skirts; and there, they waved
their cherry stalks, and heavy bloated cactus leaves, their crimson
blossoms armed with nettles; and before us flung shining, yellow,
tiger-flowers spotted red.

“Blood!” cried Yoomy, starting, “and leopards on your track!”

And now the syrens blew through long reeds, tasseled with their
panicles, and waving verdant scarfs of vines, came dancing toward us,
proffering clustering grapes.

“For all now yours, Taji; and all that yet may come,” cried Yoomy, “fly
to me! I will dance away your gloom, and drown it in inebriation.”

“Away! woe is its own wine. What may be mine, that will I endure, in
its own essence to the quick. Let me feel the poniard if it stabs.”

They vanished in the wood; and hurrying on, we soon gained sun-light,
and the open glade.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.
They Embark From Diranda


Arrived at the Sign of the Skulls, we found the illustrious lord
seigniors at rest from their flight, and once more, quaffing their
claret, all thoughts of the specter departed. Instead of rattling their
own ivory iii the heads on their shoulders, they were rattling their
dice in the skulls in their hands. And still “Heads,” was the cry, and
“Heads,” was the throw.

That evening they made known to my lord Media that an interval of two
days must elapse ere the games were renewed, in order to reward the
victors, bury their dead, and provide for the execution of an Islander,
who under the provocation of a blow, had killed a stranger.

As this suspension of the festivities had been wholly unforeseen, our
hosts were induced to withdraw the embargo laid upon our canoes.
Nevertheless, they pressed us to remain; saying, that what was to come
would far exceed in interest, what had already taken place. The games
in prospect being of a naval description, embracing certain
hand-to-hand contests in the water between shoals of web-footed
warriors.

However, we decided to embark on the morrow.

It was in the cool of the early morning, at that hour when a man’s face
can be known, that we set sail from Diranda; and in the ghostly
twilight, our thoughts reverted to the phantom that so suddenly had
cleared the plain. With interest we hearkened to the recitals of Mohi;
who discoursing of the sad end of many brave chieftains in Mardi, made
allusion to the youthful Adondo, one of the most famous of the chiefs
of the chronicles. In a canoe-fight, after performing prodigies of
valor; he was wounded in the head, and sunk to the bottom of the
lagoon.

“There is a noble monody upon the death of Adondo,” said Yoomy. “Shall
I sing it, my lord? It. is very beautiful; nor could I ever repeat it
without a tear.”

“We will dispense with your tears, minstrel,” said Media, “but sing it,
if you will.”

And Yoomy sang:—

Departed the pride and the glory of Mardi:
The vaunt of her isles sleeps deep in the sea,
    That rolls o’er his corpse with a hush.
    His warriors bend over their spears,
    His sisters gaze upward and mourn.
        Weep, weep, for Adondo, is dead!
    The sun has gone down in a shower;
    Buried in clouds in the face of the moon;
Tears stand in the eyes of the starry skies,
    And stand in the eyes of the flowers;
And streams of tears are the trickling brooks,
    Coursing adown the mountains.—
Departed the pride, and the glory of Mardi:
The vaunt of her isles sleeps deep in the sea.
Fast falls the small rain on its bosom that sobs.—
    Not showers of rain, but the tears of Oro.


“A dismal time it must have been,” yawned Media, “not a dry brook then
in Mardi, not a lake that was not moist. Lachrymose rivulets, and
inconsolable lagoons! Call you this poetry, minstrel?”

“Mohi has something like a tear in his eye,” said Yoomy.

“False!” cried Mohi, brushing it aside.

“Who composed that monody?” said Babbalanja. “I have often heard it
before.”

“None know, Babbalanja but the poet must be still singing to himself;
his songs bursting through the turf in the flowers over his grave.”

“But gentle Yoomy, Adondo is a legendary hero, indefinitely dating
back. May not his monody, then, be a spontaneous melody, that has been
with us since Mardi began? What bard composed the soft verses that our
palm boughs sing at even? Nay, Yoomy, that monody was not written by
man.”

“Ah! Would that I had been the poet, Babbalanja; for then had I been
famous indeed; those lines are chanted through all the isles, by prince
and peasant. Yes, Adondo’s monody will pervade the ages, like the low
under-tone you hear, when many singers do sing.”

“My lord, my lord,” cried Babbalanja, “but this were to be truly
immortal;—to be perpetuated in our works, and not in our names. Let me,
oh Oro! be anonymously known!”




CHAPTER XXXIX.
Wherein Babbalanja Discourses Of Himself


An interval of silence was at last broken by Babbalanja.

Pointing to the sun, just gaining the horizon, he exclaimed, “As old
Bardianna says—shut your eyes, and believe.”

“And what may Bardianna have to do with yonder orb?” said Media.

This much, my lord, the astronomers maintain that Mardi moves round the
sun; which I, who never formally investigated the matter for myself,
can by no means credit; unless, plainly seeing one thing, I blindly
believe another. Yet even thus blindly does all Mardi subscribe to an
astronomical system, which not one in fifty thousand can astronomically
prove. And not many centuries back, my lord, all Mardi did equally
subscribe to an astronomical system, precisely the reverse of that
which they now believe. But the mass of Mardians have not as much
reason to believe the first system, as the exploded one; for all who
have eyes must assuredly see, that the sun seems to move, and that
Mardi seems a fixture, eternally _here_. But doubtless there are
theories which may be true, though the face of things belie them.
Hence, in such cases, to the ignorant, disbelief would seem more
natural than faith; though they too often reject the testimony of their
own senses, for what to them, is a mere hypothesis. And thus, my lord,
is it, that the mass of Mardians do not believe because they know, but
because they know not. And they are as ready to receive one thing as
another, if it comes from a canonical source. My lord, Mardi is as an
ostrich, which will swallow augh you offer, even a bar of iron, if
placed endwise. And though the iron be indigestible, yet it serves to
fill: in feeding, the end proposed. For Mardi must have something to
exercise its digestion, though that something be forever indigestible.
And as fishermen for sport, throw two lumps of bait, united by a cord,
to albatrosses floating on the sea; which are greedily attempted to be
swallowed, one lump by this fowl, the other by that; but forever are
kept reciprocally going up and down in them, by means of the cord; even
so, my lord, do I sometimes fancy, that our theorists divert
them-selves with the greediness of Mardians to believe.”

“Ha, ha,” cried Media, “methinks this must be Azzageddi who speaks.”

“No, my lord; not long since, Azzageddi received a furlough to go home
and warm himself for a while. But this leaves me not alone.”

“How?”

“My lord,—for the present putting Azzageddi entirely aside,—though I
have now been upon terms of close companionship with myself for nigh
five hundred moons, I have not yet been able to decide who or what I
am. To you, perhaps, I seem Babbalanja; but to myself, I seem not
myself. All I am sure of, is a sort of prickly sensation all over me,
which they call life; and, occasionally, a headache or a queer conceit
admonishes me, that there is something astir in my attic. But how know
I, that these sensations are identical with myself? For aught I know, I
may be somebody else. At any rate, I keep an eye on myself, as I would
on a stranger. There is something going on in me, that is independent
of me. Many a time, have I willed to do one thing, and another has been
done. I will not say by myself, for I was not consulted about it; it
was done instinctively. My most virtuous thoughts are not born of my
musings, but spring up in me, like bright fancies to the poet;
unsought, spontaneous. Whence they come I know not. I am a blind man
pushed from behind; in vain, I turn about to see what propels me. As
vanity, I regard the praises of my friends; for what they commend
pertains not to me, Babbalanja; but to this unknown something that
forces me to it. But why am I, a middle aged Mardian, less prone to
excesses than when a youth? The same inducements and allurements are
around me. But no; my more ardent passions are burned out; those which
are strongest when we are least able to resist them. Thus, then, my
lord, it is not so much outer temptations that prevail over us mortals;
but inward instincts.”

“A very curious speculation,” said Media. But Babbalanja, have you
mortals no moral sense, as they call it?”

“We have. But the thing you speak of is but an after-birth; we eat and
drink many months before we are conscious of thoughts. And though some
adults would seem to refer all their actions to this moral sense, yet,
in reality, it is not so; for, dominant in them, their moral sense
bridles their instinctive passions; wherefore, they do not govern
themselves, but are governed by their very natures. Thus, some men in
youth are constitutionally as staid as I am now. But shall we pronounce
them pious and worthy youths for this? Does he abstain, who is not
incited? And on the other hand, if the instinctive passions through
life naturally have the supremacy over the moral sense, as in extreme
cases we see it developed in irreclaimable malefactors,—shall we
pronounce such, criminal and detestable wretches? My lord, it is easier
for some men to be saints, than for others not to be sinners.”

“That will do, Babbalanja; you are on the verge, take not the leap! Go
back whence you set out, and tell us of that other, and still more
mysterious Azzageddi; him whom you hinted to have palmed himself off on
you for you yourself.”

“Well, then, my lord,—Azzageddi still set aside,—upon that self-same
inscrutable stranger, I charge all those past actions of mine, which in
the retrospect appear to me such eminent folly, that I am confident, it
was not I, Babbalanja, now speaking, that committed them. Nevertheless,
my lord, this very day I may do some act, which at a future period may
seem equally senseless; for in one lifetime we live a hundred lives. By
the incomprehensible stranger in me, I say, this body of mine has been
rented out scores of times, though always one dark chamber in me is
retained by the old mystery.”

“Will you never come to the mark, Babbalanja? Tell me something direct
of the stranger. Who, what is he? Introduce him.”

“My lord, I can not. He is locked up in me. In a mask, he dodges me. He
prowls about in me, hither and thither; he peers, and I stare. This is
he who talks in my sleep, revealing my secrets; and takes me to unheard
of realms, beyond the skies of Mardi. So present is he always, that I
seem not so much to live of myself, as to be a mere apprehension of the
unaccountable being that is in me. Yet all the time, this being is I,
myself.”

“Babbalanja,” said Media, “you have fairly turned yourself inside out.”

“Yes, my lord,” said Mohi, “and he has so unsettled me, that I begin to
think all Mardi a square circle.”

“How is that, Babbalanja,” said Media, “is a circle square?”

“No, my lord, but ever since Mardi began, we Mardians have been
essaying our best to square it.”

“Cleverly retorted. Now, Babbalanja, do you not imagine, that you may
do harm by disseminating these sophisms of yours; which like your devil
theory, would seem to relieve all Mardi from moral accountability?”

“My lord, at bottom, men wear no bonds that other men can strike off;
and have no immunities, of which other men can deprive them. Tell a
good man that he is free to commit murder,—will he murder? Tell a
murderer that at the peril of his soul he indulges in murderous
thoughts,—will that make him a saint?”

“Again on the verge, Babbalanja? Take not the leap, I say.”

“I can leap no more, my lord. Already I am down, down, down.”

“Philosopher,” said Media, “what with Azzageddi, and the mysterious
indweller you darkly hint of, I marvel not that you are puzzled to
decide upon your identity. But when do you seem most yourself?”

“When I sleep, and dream not, my lord.”

“Indeed?”

“Why then, a fool’s cap might be put on you, and you would not know
it.”

“The very turban he ought to wear,” muttered Mohi.

“Yet, my lord, I live while consciousness is not mine, while to all
appearances I am a clod. And may not this same state of being, though
but alternate with me, be continually that of many dumb, passive
objects we so carelessly regard? Trust me, there are more things alive
than those that crawl, or fly, or swim. Think you, my lord, there is no
sensation in being a tree? feeling the sap in one’s boughs, the breeze
in one’s foliage? think you it is nothing to be a world? one of a herd,
bison-like, wending its way across boundless meadows of ether? In the
sight of a fowl, that sees not our souls, what are our own tokens of
animation? That we move, make a noise, have organs, pulses, and are
compounded of fluids and solids. And all these are in this Mardi as a
unit. Daily the slow, majestic throbbings of its heart are perceptible
on the surface in the tides of the la-goon. Its rivers are its veins;
when agonized, earthquakes are its throes; it shouts in the thunder,
and weeps in the shower; and as the body of a bison is covered with
hair, so Mardi is covered with grasses and vegetation, among which, we
parasitical things do but crawl, vexing and tormenting the patient
creature to which we cling. Nor yet, hath it recovered from the pain of
the first foundation that was laid. Mardi is alive to its axis. When
you pour water, does it not gurgle? When you strike a pearl shell, does
it not ring? Think you there is no sensation in being a rock?—To exist,
is to be; to be, is to be something: to be something, is—”

“Go on,” said Media.

“And what is it, to be something?” said Yoomy artlessly. “Bethink
yourself of what went before,” said Media.

“Lose not the thread,” said Mohi.

“It has snapped,” said Babbalanja.

“I breathe again,” said Mohi.

“But what a stepping-off place you came to then, philosopher,” said
Media. “By the way, is it not old Bardianna who says, that no Mardian
should undertake to walk, without keeping one foot foremost?”

“To return to the vagueness of the notion I have of myself,” said
Babbalanja.

“An appropriate theme,” said Media, “proceed.”

“My lord,” murmured Mohi, “Is not this philosopher like a centipede?
Cut off his head, and still he crawls.”

“There are times when I fancy myself a lunatic,” resumed Babbalanja.

“Ah, now he’s beginning to talk sense,” whispered Mohi.

“Surely you forget, Babbalanja,” said Media. “How many more theories
have you? First, you are possessed by a devil; then rent yourself out
to the indweller; and now turn yourself into a mad-house. You are
inconsistent.”

“And for that very reason, my lord, not inconsistent; for the sum of my
inconsistencies makes up my consistency. And to be consistent to one’s
self, is often to be inconsistent to Mardi. Common consistency implies
unchangeableness; but much of the wisdom here below lives in a state of
transition.”

“Ah!” murmured Mold, “my head goes round again.”

“Azzageddi aside, then, my lord, and also, for the nonce, the
mysterious indweller, I come now to treat of myself as a lunatic. But
this last conceit is not so much based upon the madness of particular
actions, as upon the whole drift of my ordinary and hourly ones; those,
in which I most resemble all other Mardians. It seems like going
through with some nonsensical whim-whams, destitute of fixed purpose.
For though many of my actions seem to have objects, and all of them
somehow run into each other; yet, where is the grand result? To what
final purpose, do I walk about, eat, think, dream? To what great end,
does Mohi there, now stroke his beard?”

“But I was doing it unconsciously,” said Mohi, dropping his hand, and
lifting his head.

“Just what I would be at, old man. ‘What we do, we do blindly,’ says
old Bardianna. Many things we do, we do without knowing,—as with you
and your beard, Mohi. And many others we know not, in their true
bearing at least, till they are past. Are not half our lives spent in
reproaches for foregone actions, of the true nature and consequences of
which, we were wholly ignorant at the time? Says old Bardianna, ‘Did I
not so often feel an appetite for my yams, I should think every thing a
dream;’—so puzzling to him, seemed the things of this Mardi. But
Alla-Malolla goes further. Says he, ‘Let us club together,
fellow-riddles:—Kings, clowns, and intermediates. We are bundles of
comical sensations; we bejuggle ourselves into strange phantasies: we
are air, wind, breath, bubbles; our being is told in a tick.’”

“Now, then, Babbalanja,” said Media, “what have you come to in all this
rhapsody? You everlastingly travel in a circle.”

“And so does the sun in heaven, my lord; like me, it goes round, and
gives light as it goes. Old Bardianna, too, revolved. He says so
himself. In his roundabout chapter on Cycles and Epicycles, with Notes
on the Ecliptic, he thus discourseth:—‘All things revolve upon some
center, to them, fixed; for the centripetal is ever too much for the
centrifugal. Wherefore, it is a perpetual cycling with us, without
progression; and we fly round, whether we will or no. To stop, were to
sink into space. So, over and over we go, and round and round;
double-shuffle, on our axis, and round the sun.’ In an another place,
he says:—‘There is neither apogee nor perigee, north nor south, right
nor left; what to-night is our zenith, to-morrow is our nadir; stand as
we will, we stand on our heads; essay to spring into the air, and down
we come; here we stick; our very bones make glue.’”

“Enough, enough, Babbalanja,” cried Media. “You are a very wise
Mardian; but the wisest Mardians make the most consummate fools.”

“So they do, my lord; but I was interrupted. I was about to say, that
there is no place but the universe; no limit but the limitless; no
bottom but the bottomless.”




CHAPTER XL.
Of The Sorcerers In The Isle Of Minda


“Tiffin! tiffin!” cried Media; “time for tiffin! Up, comrades! and
while the mat is being spread, walk we to the bow, and inhale the
breeze for an appetite. Hark ye, Vee-Vee! forget not that calabash with
the sea-blue seal, and a round ring for a brand. Rare old stuff, that,
Mohi; older than you: the circumnavigator, I call it. My sire had a
canoe launched for the express purpose of carrying it thrice round
Mardi for a flavor. It was many moons on the voyage; the mariners never
sailed faster than three knots. Ten would spoil the best wine ever
floated.”

Tiffin over, and the blue-sealed calabash all but hid in the great
cloud raised by our pipes, Media proposed to board it in the smoke. So,
goblet in hand, we all gallantly charged, and came off victorious from
the fray.

Then seated again, and serenely puffing in a circle, the
circumnavigator meanwhile pleasantly going the rounds, Media called
upon Mohi for something entertaining.

Now, of all the old gossips in Mardi, surely our delightful old
Diodorus was furnished with the greatest possible variety of histories,
chronicles, anecdotes, memoirs, legends, traditions, and biographies.
There was no end to the library he carried. In himself, he was the
whole history of Mardi, amplified, not abridged, in one volume.

In obedience, then, to King Media’s command, Mohi regaled the company
with a narrative, in substance as follows:—

In a certain quarter of the Archipelago was an island called Minda; and
in Minda were many sorcerers, employed in the social differences and
animosities of the people of that unfortunate land. If a Mindarian
deemed himself aggrieved or insulted by a countryman, he forthwith
repaired to one of these sorcerers; who, for an adequate consideration,
set to work with his spells, keeping himself in the dark, and directing
them against the obnoxious individual. And full soon, by certain
peculiar sensations, this individual, discovering what was going on,
would straightway hie to his own professor of the sable art, who, being
well feed, in due time brought about certain counter-charms, so that in
the end it sometimes fell out that neither party was gainer or loser,
save by the sum of his fees.

But the worst of it was, that in some cases all knowledge of these
spells were at the outset hidden from the victim; who, hearing too late
of the mischief brewing, almost always fell a prey to his foe; which
calamity was held the height of the art. But as the great body of
sorcerers were about matched in point of skill, it followed that the
parties employing them were so likewise. Hence arose those interminable
contests, in which many moons were spent, both parties toiling after
their common destruction.

Indeed, to say nothing of the obstinacy evinced by their employers, it
was marvelous, the pertinacity of the sorcerers themselves. To the very
last tooth in their employer’s pouches, they would stick to their
spells; never giving over till he was financially or physically
defunct.

But much as they were vilified, no people in Minda were half so
disinterested as they. Certain indispensable conditions secured, some
of them were as ready to undertake the perdition of one man as another;
good, bad, or indifferent, it made little matter.

What wonder, then, that such abominable mercenaries should cause a
mighty deal of mischief in Minda; privately going about, inciting
peaceable folks to enmities with their neighbors; and with marvelous
alacrity, proposing themselves as the very sorcerers to rid them of the
annoyances suggested as existing.

Indeed, it even happened that a sorcerer would be secretly retained to
work spells upon a victim, who, from his bodily sensations, suspecting
something wrong, but knowing not what, would repair to that self-same
sorcerer, engaging him to counteract any mischief that might be
brewing. And this worthy would at once undertake the business; when,
having both parties in his hands, he kept them forever in suspense;
meanwhile seeing to it well, that they failed not in handsomely
remunerating him for his pains.

At one time, there was a prodigious excitement about these sorcerers,
growing out of some alarming revelations concerning their practices. In
several villages of Minda, they were sought to be put down. But
fruitless the attempt; it was soon discovered that already their spells
were so spread abroad, and they themselves so mixed up with the
everyday affairs of the isle, that it was better to let their vocation
alone, than, by endeavoring to suppress it, breed additional troubles.
Ah! they were a knowing and a cunning set, those sorcerers; very hard
to overcome, cajole, or circumvent.

But in the name of the Magi, what were these spells of theirs, so
potent and occult? On all hands it was agreed, that they derived their
greatest virtue from the fumes of certain compounds, whose
ingredients—horrible to tell—were mostly obtained from the human heart;
and that by variously mixing these ingredients, they adapted their
multifarious enchantments.

They were a vain and arrogant race. Upon the strength of their dealing
in the dark, they affected even more mystery than belonged to them;
when interrogated concerning their science, would confound the inquirer
by answers couched in an extraordinary jargon, employing words almost
as long as anacondas. But all this greatly prevailed with the common
people.

Nor was it one of the least remarkable things, that oftentimes two
sorcerers, contrarily employed upon a Mindarian,—one to attack, the
other to defend,—would nevertheless be upon the most friendly terms
with each other; which curious circumstance never begat the slightest
suspicions in the mind of the victim.

Another phenomenon: If from any cause, two sorcerers fell out, they
seldom exercised their spells upon each other; ascribable to this,
perhaps,—that both being versed in the art, neither could hope to get
the advantage.

But for all the opprobrium cast upon these sorcerers, part of which
they deserved, the evils imputed to them were mainly, though
indirectly, ascribable to the very persons who abused them; nay, to the
very persons who employed them; the latter being by far the loudest in
their vilifyings; for which, indeed, they had excellent reason.

Nor was it to be denied, that in certain respects, the sorcerers were
productive of considerable good. The nature of their pursuits leading
them deep into the arcana of mind, they often lighted upon important
discoveries; along with much that was cumbersome, accumulated valuable
examples concerning the inner working of the hearts of the Mindarians;
and often waxed eloquent in elucidating the mysteries of iniquity.

Yet was all this their lore graven upon so uncouth, outlandish, and
antiquated tablets, that it was all but lost to the mass of their
countrymen; and some old sachem of a wise man is quoted as having said,
that their treasures were locked up after such a fashion, that for old
iron, the key was worth more than the chest and its contents.




CHAPTER XLI.
Chiefly Of Sing Bello


“Now Taji,” said Media, “with old Bello of the Hump whose island of
Dominora is before us, I am at variance.”

“Ah! How so?”

“A dull recital, but you shall have it.”

And forthwith his Highness began.

This princely quarrel originated, it seems, in a slight jostling
concerning the proprietorship of a barren islet in a very remote
quarter of the lagoon. At the outset the matter might have been easily
adjusted, had the parties but exchanged a few amicable words. But each
disdaining to visit the other, to discuss so trivial an affair, the
business of negotiating an understanding was committed to certain
plenipos, men with lengthy tongues, who scorned to utter a word short
of a polysyllable.

Now, the more these worthies penetrated into the difficulty, the wider
became the breach; till what was at first a mere gap, became a yawning
gulf.

But that which had perhaps tended more than any thing else to deepen
the variance of the kings, was hump-backed Bello’s dispatching to Odo,
as his thirtieth plenipo, a diminutive little negotiator, who all by
himself, in a solitary canoe, sailed over to have audience of Media;
into whose presence he was immediately ushered.

Darting one glance at him, the king turned to his chieftains, and
said:—“By much straining of your eyes, my lords, can you perceive this
insignificant manikin? What! are there no tall men in Dominora, that
King Bello must needs send this dwarf hither?”

And charging his attendents to feed the embassador extraordinary with
the soft pap of the cocoanut, and provide nurses during his stay, the
monarch retired from the arbor of audience.

“As I am a man,” shouted the despised plenipo, raising himself on his
toes, “my royal master will resent this affront!—A dwarf, forsooth!—
Thank Oro, I am no long-drawn giant! There is as much stuff in me, as
in others; what is spread out in their clumsy carcasses, in me is
condensed. I am much in little! And that much, thou shalt know full
soon, disdainful King of Odo!”

“Speak not against our lord the king,” cried the attendants.

“And speak not ye to me, ye headless spear poles!”

And so saying, under sufferance of being small, the plenipo was
permitted to depart unmolested; for all his bravadoes, fobbing his
credentials and affronts.

Apprized of his servant’s ignoble reception, the choleric Bello burst
forth in a storm of passion; issuing orders for, one thousand conch
shells to be blown, and his warriors to assemble by land and by sea.

But bethinking him of the hostilities that might ensue, the sagacious
Media hit upon an honorable expedient to ward off an event for which he
was then unprepared. With all haste he dispatched to the hump-backed
king a little dwarf of his own; who voyaging over to Dominora in a
canoe, sorry and solitary as that of Bello’s plenipo, in like manner,
received the same insults. The effect whereof, was, to strike a balance
of affronts; upon the principle, that a blow given, heals one received.

Nevertheless, these proceedings but amounted to a postponement of
hostilities; for soon after, nothing prevented the two kings from
plunging into war, but the following judicious considerations. First:
Media was almost afraid of being beaten. Second: Bello was almost
afraid to conquer. Media, because he was inferior in men and arms;
Bello, because, his aggrandizement was already a subject of warlike
comment among the neighboring kings.

Indeed, did the old chronicler Braid-Beard speak truth, there were some
tribes in Mardi, that accounted this king of Dominora a testy,
quarrelsome, rapacious old monarch; the indefatigable breeder of
contentions and wars; the elder brother of this household of nations,
perpetually essaying to lord it over the juveniles; and though his
patrimonial dominions were situated to the north of the lagoon, not the
slightest misunderstanding took place between the rulers of the most
distant islands, than this doughty old cavalier on a throne, forthwith
thrust his insolent spear into the matter, though it in no wise
concerned him, and fell to irritating all parties by his gratuitous
interference.

Especially was he officious in the concerns of Porpheero, a neighboring
island, very large and famous, whose numerous broad valleys were
divided among many rival kings:—the king of Franko, a small-framed,
poodle-haired, fine, fiery gallant; finical in his tatooing; much given
to the dance and glory;—the king of Ibeereea, a tall and stately
cavalier, proud, generous, punctilious, temperate in wine; one hand
forever on his javelin, the other, in superstitious homage, lifted to
his gods; his limbs all over marks of stakes and crosses;—the king of
Luzianna; a slender, dark-browed thief; at times wrapped in a moody
robe, beneath which he fumbled something, as if it were a dagger; but
otherwise a sprightly troubadour, given to serenades and
moonlight;—-the many chiefs of sunny Latianna; minstrel monarchs, full
of song and sentiment; fiercer in love than war; glorious bards of
freedom; but rendering tribute while they sang;—the priest-king of
Vatikanna; his chest marked over with antique tatooings; his crown, a
cowl; his rusted scepter swaying over falling towers, and crumbling
mounds; full of the superstitious past; askance, eyeing the suspicious
time to come;—the king of Hapzaboro; portly, pleasant; a lover of wild
boar’s meat; a frequent quaffer from the can; in his better moods, much
fancying solid comfort;—the eight-and-thirty banded kings, chieftains,
seigniors, and oligarchies of the broad hill and dale of Tutoni;
clubbing together their domains, that none might wrest his neighbor’s;
an earnest race; deep thinkers, deeper drinkers; long pipes, long
heads; their wise ones given to mystic cogitations, and consultations
with the devil;—the twin kings of Zandinavia; hardy, frugal
mountaineers; upright of spine and heart; clad in skins of bears;—the
king of Jutlanda; much like their Highnesses of Zandinavia; a seal-skin
cap his crown; a fearless sailor of his frigid seas;—the king of
Muzkovi; a shaggy, icicled White-bear of a despot in the north; said to
reign over millions of acres of glaciers; had vast provinces of
snow-drifts, and many flourishing colonies among the floating icebergs.
Absolute in his rule as Predestination in metaphysics, did he command
all his people to give up the ghost, it would be held treason to die
last. Very precise and foppish in his imperial tastes was this monarch.
Disgusted with the want of uniformity in the stature of his subjects,
he was said to nourish thoughts of killing off all those below his
prescribed standard—six feet, long measure. Immortal souls were of no
account in his fatal wars; since, in some of his serf-breeding estates,
they were daily manufactured to order.

Now, to all the above-mentioned monarchs, old Bello would frequently
dispatch heralds; announcing, for example, his unalterable resolution,
to espouse the cause of this king, against that; at the very time,
perhaps, that their Serene Superfluities, instead of crossing spears,
were touching flagons. And upon these occasions, the kings would often
send back word to old Bello, that instead of troubling himself with
their concerns, he might far better attend to his own; which, they
hinted, were in a sad way, and much needed reform.

The royal old warrior’s pretext for these and all similar proceedings,
was the proper adjustment in Porpheero, of what he facetiously styled
the “Equipoise of Calabashes;” which he stoutly swore was essential to
the security of the various tribes in that country.

“But who put the balance into thy hands, King Bello?” cried the
indignant nations.

“Oro!” shouted the hump-backed king, shaking his javelin.

Superadded to the paternal interest which Bello betrayed in the
concerns of the kings of Porpheero, according to our chronicler, he
also manifested no less interest in those of the remotest islands.
Indeed, where he found a rich country, inhabited by a people, deemed by
him barbarous and incapable of wise legislation, he sometimes relieved
them from their political anxieties, by assuming the dictatorship over
them. And if incensed at his conduct, they flew to their spears, they
were accounted rebels, and treated accordingly. But as old Mohi very
truly observed,—herein, Bello was not alone; for throughout Mardi, all
strong nations, as well as all strong men, loved to govern the weak.
And those who most taunted King Bello for his political rapacity, were
open to the very same charge. So with Vivenza, a distant island, at
times very loud in denunciations of Bello, as a great national brigand.
Not yet wholly extinct in Vivenza, were its aboriginal people, a race
of wild Nimrods and hunters, who year by year were driven further and
further into remoteness, till as one of their sad warriors said, after
continual removes along the log, his race was on the point of being
remorselessly pushed off the end.

Now, Bello was a great geographer, and land surveyor, and gauger of the
seas. Terraqueous Mardi, he was continually exploring in quest of
strange empires. Much he loved to take the altitude of lofty mountains,
the depth of deep rivers, the breadth of broad isles. Upon the highest
pinnacles of commanding capes and promontories, he loved to hoist his
flag. He circled Mardi with his watch-towers: and the distant voyager
passing wild rocks in the remotest waters, was startled by hearing the
tattoo, or the reveille, beating from hump-backed Bello’s omnipresent
drum. Among Antartic glaciers, his shrill bugle calls mingled with the
scream of the gulls; and so impressed seemed universal nature with the
sense of his dominion, that the very clouds in heaven never sailed over
Dominora without rendering the tribute of a shower; whence the air of
Dominora was more moist than that of any other clime.

In all his grand undertakings, King Bello was marvelously assisted by
his numerous fleets of war-canoes; his navy being the largest in Mardi.
Hence his logicians swore that the entire Lagoon was his; and that all
prowling whales, prowling keels, and prowling sharks were invaders. And
with this fine conceit to inspire them, his poets-laureat composed some
glorious old saltwater odes, enough to make your very soul sing to hear
them.

But though the rest of Mardi much delighted to list to such noble
minstrelsy, they agreed not with Bello’s poets in deeming the lagoon
their old monarch’s hereditary domain.

Once upon a time, the paddlers of the hump-backed king, meeting upon
the broad lagoon certain canoes belonging to the before-mentioned
island of Vivenza; these paddlers seized upon several of their
occupants; and feeling their pulses, declared them born men of
Dominora; and therefore, not free to go whithersoever they would; for,
unless they could somehow get themselves born over again, they must
forever remain subject to Bello. Shed your hair; nay, your skin, if you
will, but shed your allegiance you can not; while you have bones, they
are Bello’s. So, spite of all expostulations and attempts to prove
alibis, these luckless paddlers were dragged into the canoes of
Dominora, and commanded to paddle home their captors.

Whereof hearing, the men of Vivenza were thrown into a great ferment;
and after a mighty pow-wow over their council fire, fitting out several
double-keeled canoes, they sallied out to sea, in quest of those, whom
they styled the wholesale corsairs of Dominora.

But lucky perhaps it was, that at this juncture, in all parts of Mardi,
the fleets of the hump-backed king, were fighting, gunwale and gunwale,
alongside of numerous foes; else there had borne down upon the canoes
of the men of Vivenza so tremendous an armada, that the very swell
under its thousand prows might have flooded their scattered proas
forever out of sight.

As it was, Bello dispatched a few of his smaller craft to seek out, and
incidentally run down the enemy; and without returning home,
straightway proceed upon more important enterprises.

But it so chanced, that Bello’s crafts, one by one meeting the foe, in
most cases found the canoes of Vivenza much larger than their own; and
manned by more men, with hearts bold as theirs; whence, in the
ship-duels that ensued, they were worsted; and the canoes of Vivenza,
locking their yard-arms into those of the vanquished, very courteously
gallanted them into their coral harbors.

Solely imputing these victories to their superior intrepidity and
skill, the people of Vivenza were exceedingly boisterous in their
triumph; raising such obstreperous peans, that they gave themselves
hoarse throats; insomuch, that according to Mohi, some of the present
generation are fain to speak through their noses.




CHAPTER XLII.
Dominora And Vivenza


The three canoes still gliding on, some further particulars were
narrated concerning Dominora; and incidentally, of other isles.

It seems that his love of wide dominion sometimes led the otherwise
sagacious Bello into the most extravagant actions. If the chance
accumulation of soil and drift-wood about any detached shelf of coral
in the lagoon held forth the remotest possibility of the eventual
existence of an islet there, with all haste he dispatched canoes to the
spot, to take prospective possession of the as yet nearly submarine
territory; and if possible, eject the zoophytes.

During an unusually low tide, here and there baring the outer reef of
the Archipelago, Bello caused his royal spear to be planted upon every
place thus exposed, in token of his supreme claim thereto.

Another anecdote was this: that to Dominora there came a rumor, that in
a distant island dwelt a man with an uncommonly large nose; of most
portentous dimensions, indeed; by the soothsayers supposed to
foreshadow some dreadful calamity. But disregarding these superstitious
conceits, Bello forthwith dispatched an agent, to discover whether this
huge promontory of a nose was geographically available; if so, to
secure the same, by bringing the proprietor back.

Now, by sapient old Mohi, it was esteemed a very happy thing for Mardi
at large, that the subjects whom Bello sent to populate his foreign
acquisitions, were but too apt to throw off their vassalage, so soon as
they deemed themselves able to cope with him.

Indeed, a fine country in the western part of Mardi, in this very
manner, became a sovereign—nay, a republican state. It was the nation
to which Mohi had previously alluded—Vivenza. But in the flush and
pride of having recently attained their national majority, the men of
Vivenza were perhaps too much inclined to carry a vauntful crest. And
because intrenched in their fastnesses, after much protracted fighting,
they had eventually succeeded in repelling the warriors dispatched by
Bello to crush their insurrection, they were unanimous in the opinion,
that the hump-backed king had never before been so signally chastised.
Whereas, they had not so much vanquished Bello, as defended their
shores; even as a young lion will protect its den against legions of
unicorns, though, away from home, he might be torn to pieces. In truth,
Braid-Beard declared, that at the time of this war, Dominora couched
ten long spears for every short javelin Vivenza could dart; though the
javelins were stoutly hurled as the spears.

But, superior in men and arms, why, at last, gave over King Bello the
hope of reducing those truculent men of Vivenza? One reason was, as
Mohi said, that many of his fighting men were abundantly occupied in
other quarters of Mardi; nor was he long in discovering that fight he
never so valiantly, Vivenza—not yet its inhabitants—was wholly
unconquerable. Thought Bello, Mountains are sturdy foes; fate hard to
dam.

Yet, the men of Vivenza were no dastards; not to lie, coming from
lion-like loins, they were a lion-loined race. Did not their bards
pronounce them a fresh start in the Mardian species; requiring a new
world for their full development? For be it known, that the great land
of Kolumbo, no inconsiderable part of which was embraced by Vivenza,
was the last island discovered in the Archipelago.

In good round truth, and as if an impartialist from Arcturus spoke it,
Vivenza was a noble land. Like a young tropic tree she stood, laden
down with greenness, myriad blossoms, and the ripened fruit
thick-hanging from one bough. She was promising as the morning.

Or Vivenza might be likened to St. John, feeding on locusts and wild
honey, and with prophetic voice, crying to the nations from the
wilderness. Or, child-like, standing among the old robed kings and
emperors of the Archipelago, Vivenza seemed a young Messiah, to whose
discourse the bearded Rabbis bowed.

So seemed Vivenza in its better aspect. Nevertheless, Vivenza was a
braggadocio in Mardi; the only brave one ever known. As an army of
spurred and crested roosters, her people chanticleered at the
resplendent rising of their sun. For shame, Vivenza! Whence thy
undoubted valor? Did ye not bring it with ye from the bold old shores
of Dominora, where there is a fullness of it left? What isle but
Dominora could have supplied thee with that stiff spine of thine?— That
heart of boldest beat? Oh, Vivenza! know that true grandeur is too big
for a boast; and nations, as well as men, may be too clever to be
great.

But what more of King Bello? Notwithstanding his territorial
acquisitiveness, and aversion to relinquishing stolen nations, he was
yet a glorious old king; rather choleric—a word and a blow—but of a
right royal heart. Rail at him as they might, at bottom, all the isles
were proud of him. And almost in spite of his rapacity, upon the whole,
perhaps, they were the better for his deeds. For if sometimes he did
evil with no very virtuous intentions, he had fifty, ways of
accomplishing good with the best; and a thousand ways of doing good
without meaning it. According to an ancient oracle, the hump-backed
monarch was but one of the most conspicuous pieces on a board, where
the gods played for their own entertainment.

But here it must not be omitted, that of late, King Bello had somewhat
abated his efforts to extend his dominions. Various causes were
assigned. Some thought it arose from the fact that already he found his
territories too extensive for one scepter to rule; that his more remote
colonies largely contributed to his tribulations, without
correspondingly contributing to his revenues. Others affirmed that his
hump was getting too mighty for him to carry; others still, that the
nations were waving too strong for him. With prophetic solemnity,
head-shaking sages averred that he was growing older and older had
passed his grand climacteric; and though it was a hale old age with
him, yet it was not his lusty youth; that though he was daily getting
rounder, and rounder in girth, and more florid of face, that these,
howbeit, were rather the symptoms of a morbid obesity, than of a
healthful robustness. These wise ones predicted that very soon poor
Bello would go off in an apoplexy.

But in Vivenza there were certain blusterers, who often thus prated:
“The Hump-back’s hour is come; at last the old teamster will be gored
by the nations he’s yoked; his game is done,—let him show his hand and
throw up his scepter; he cumbers Mardi,—let him be cut down and burned;
he stands in the way of his betters,—let him sheer to one side; he has
shut up many eyes, and now himself grows blind; he hath committed
horrible atrocities during his long career, the old sinner! —now, let
him quickly say his prayers and be beheaded.”

Howbeit, Bello lived on; enjoying his dinners, and taking his jorums as
of yore. Ah, I have yet a jolly long lease of life, thought he over his
wine; and like unto some obstinate old uncle, he persisted in
flourishing, in spite of the prognostications of the nephew nations,
which at his demise, perhaps hoped to fall heir to odd parts of his
possessions: Three streaks of fat valleys to one of lean mountains!




CHAPTER XLIII.
They Land At Dominora


As erewhile recounted, not being on the best terms in Mardi with the
King of Dominora, Media saw fit to draw nigh unto his dominions in
haughty state; he (Media) being upon excellent terms with himself. Our
sails were set, our paddles paddling, streamers streaming, and Vee-Vee
in the shark’s mouth, clamorous with his conch. The din was soon heard;
and sweeping into a fine broad bay we beheld its margin seemingly
pebbled in the distance with heads; so populous the land.

Winding through a noble valley, we presently came to Bello’s palace,
couchant and bristling in a grove. The upright canes composing its
front projected above the eaves in a long row of spear-heads fluttering
with scarlet pennons; while below, from the intervals of the canes,
were slantingly thrust three tiers of decorated lances. A warlike
aspect! The entire structure looking like the broadside of the
Macedonian phalanx, advancing to the charge, helmeted with a roof.

“Ah, Bello,” said Media, “thou dwellest among thy quills like the
porcupine.”

“I feel a prickly heat coming over me,” cried Mohi, “my lord Media, let
us enter.”

“Ay,” said Babbalanja, “safer the center of peril, than the
circumference.”

Passing under an arch, formed by two pikes crossed, we found ourselves
targets in prospective, for certain flingers of javelins, with poised
weapons, occupying the angles of the palace.

Fronting us, stood a portly old warrior, spear in hand, hump on back,
and fire in eye.

“Is it war?” he cried, pointing his pike, “or peace?” reversing it.

“Peace,” said Media.

Whereupon advancing, King Bello courteously welcomed us.

He was an arsenal to behold: Upon his head the hereditary crown of
Dominora,—a helmet of the sea-porcupine’s hide, bristling all over with
spikes, in front displaying a river-horse’s horn, leveled to the
charge; thrust through his ears were barbed arrows; and from his dyed
shark-skin girdle, depended a kilt of strung javelins.

The broad chest of Bello was the chart of Mardi. Tattooed in sea-blue
were all the groups and clusters of the Archipelago; and every time he
breathed, rose and fell the isles, as by a tide: Dominora full upon his
heart.

His sturdy thighs were his triumphal arch; whereon in numerous
medallions, crests, and shields, were blazoned all his victories by sea
and land.

His strong right arm was Dominora’s scroll of Fame, where all her
heroes saw their names recorded.—An endless roll!

Our chronicler avouched, that on the sole of Bello’s dexter foot was
stamped the crest of Franko’s king, his hereditary foe. “Thus, thus,”
cried Bello, stamping, “thus I hourly crush him.”

In stature, Bello was a mountaineer; but, as over some tall tower
impends the hill-side cliff, so Bello’s Athos hump hung over him. Could
it be, as many of his nobles held, that the old monarch’s hump was his
sensorium and source of strength; full of nerves, muscles, ganglions
and tendons? Yet, year by year it grew, ringed like the bole of his
palms. The toils of war increased it. But another skirmish with the
isles, said the wiseacres of Porpheero, and Bello’s mount will crush
him.

Against which calamity to guard, his medicos and Sangredos sought the
hump’s reduction. But down it would not come. Then by divers mystic
rites, his magi tried. Making a deep pit, many teeth they dropped
therein. But they could not fill it. Hence, they called it the Sinking
Pit, for bottom it had none. Nevertheless, the magi said, when this pit
is filled, Bello’s hump you’ll see no more. “Then, hurrah for the
hump!” cried the nobles, “for he will never hurl it off. Long life to
the hump! By the hump we will rally and die! Cheer up, King Bello!
Stand up, old king!”

But these were they, who when their sovereign went abroad, with that
Athos on his back, followed idly in its shade; while Bello leaned
heavily upon his people, staggering as they went.

Ay, sorely did Bello’s goodly stature lean; but though many swore he
soon must fall; nevertheless, like Pisa’s Leaning Tower, he may long
lean over, yet never nod.

Visiting Dominora in a friendly way, in good time, we found King Bello
very affable; in hospitality, almost exceeding portly Borabolla:
October-plenty reigned throughout his palace borders.

Our first reception over, a sumptuous repast was served, at which much
lively talk was had.

Of Taji, Bello sought to know, whether his solar Majesty had yet made a
province of the moon; whether the Astral hosts were of much account as
territories, or mere Motoos, as the little tufts of verdure are
denominated, here and there clinging to Mardi’s circle reef; whether
the people in the sun vilified, him (Bello) as they did in Mardi; and
what they thought of an event, so ominous to the liberties of the
universe, as the addition to his navy of three large canoes.

Ere long, so fused in social love we grew, that Bello, filling high his
can, and clasping Media’s palm, drank everlasting amity with Odo.

So over their red cups, the two kings forgot their differences, and
concerning the disputed islet nothing more was ever heard; especially,
as it so turned out, that while they were most hot about it, it had
suddenly gone out of sight, being of volcanic origin.




CHAPTER XLIV.
Through Dominora, They Wander After Yillah


At last, withdrawing from the presence of King Bello, we went forth,
still intent on our search.

Many brave sights we saw. Fair fields; the whole island a garden; green
hedges all round; neat lodges, thick as white mice in the landscape;
old oak woods, hale and hearty as ever; old temples buried in ivy; old
shrines of old heroes, deep buried in broad groves of bay trees; old
rivers laden down with heavy-freighted canoes; humped hills, like
droves of camels, piled up with harvests; every sign and token of a
glorious abundance, every sign and token of generations of renown. Rare
sight! fine sight! none rarer, none finer in Mardi.

But roving on through this ravishing region, we passed through a corn-
field in full beard, where a haggard old reaper laid down his hook,
beseeching charity for the sake of the gods.—“Bread, bread! or I die
mid these sheaves!”

“Thrash out your grain, and want not.”

“Alas, masters, this grain is not mine; I plough, I sow, I reap, I
bind, I stack,—Lord Primo garners.”

Rambling on, we came to a hamlet, hidden in a hollow; and beneath
weeping willows saw many mournful maidens seated on a bank; beside
each, a wheel that was broken. “Lo, we starve,” they cried, “our
distaffs are snapped; no more may we weave and spin!”

Then forth issued from vaults clamorous crowds of men, hands tied to
their backs.—“Bread! Bread!” they cried. “The magician hath turned us
out from our glen, where we labored of yore in the days of the merry
Green Queen. He has pinioned us hip and arm that we starve. Like sheep
we die off with the rot.—Curse on the magician. A curse on his spell.”

Bending our steps toward the glen, roaring down the rocks we descried a
stream from the mountains. But ere those waters gained the sea, vassal
tribute they rendered. Conducted through culverts and moats, they
turned great wheels, giving life to ten thousand fangs and fingers,
whose gripe no power could withstand, yet whose touch was soft as the
velvet paw of a kitten. With brute force, they heaved down great
weights, then daintily wove and spun; like the trunk of the elephant,
which lays lifeless a river-horse, and counts the pulses of a moth. On
all sides, the place seemed alive with its spindles. Round and round,
round and round; throwing off wondrous births at every revolving;
ceaseless as the cycles that circle in heaven. Loud hummed the loom,
flew the shuttle like lightning, red roared the grim forge, rung anvil
and sledge; yet no mortal was seen.

“What ho, magician! Come forth from thy cave!”

But all deaf were the spindles, as the mutes, that mutely wait on the
Sultan.

“Since we are born, we will live!” so we read on a crimson banner,
flouting the crimson clouds, in the van of a riotous red-bonneted mob,
racing by us as we came from the glen. Many more followed: black, or
blood-stained:—.

“Mardi is man’s!”

“Down with landholders!”

“Our turn now!”

“Up rights! Down wrongs!”

“Bread! Bread!”

“Take the tide, ere it turns!”

Waving their banners, and flourishing aloft clubs, hammers, and
sickles, with fierce yells the crowd ran on toward the palace of Bello.
Foremost, and inciting the rest by mad outcries and gestures, were six
masks; “This way! This way!” they cried,—“by the wood; by the dark
wood!” Whereupon all darted into the groves; when of a sudden, the
masks leaped forward, clearing a long covered trench, into which fell
many of those they led. But on raced the masks; and gaining Bello’s
palace, and raising the alarm, there sallied from thence a woodland of
spears, which charged upon the disordered ranks in the grove. A crash
as of icicles against icebergs round Zembla, and down went the hammers
and sickles. The host fled, hotly pursued. Meanwhile brave heralds from
Bello advanced, and with chaplets crowned the six masks.—“Welcome,
heroes! worthy and valiant!” they cried. “Thus our lord Bello rewards
all those, who to do him a service, for hire betray their kith and
their kin.”

Still pursuing our quest, wide we wandered through all the sun and
shade of Dominora; but nowhere was Yillah found.




CHAPTER XLV.
They Behold King Bello’s State Canoe


At last, bidding adieu to King Bello; and in the midst of the lowing of
oxen, breaking away from his many hospitalities, we departed for the
beach. But ere embarking, we paused to gaze at an object, which long
fixed our attention.

Now, as all bold cavaliers have ever delighted in special chargers,
gayly caparisoned, whereon upon grand occasions to sally forth upon the
plains: even so have maritime potentates ever prided themselves upon
some holiday galley, splendidly equipped, wherein to sail over the sea.

When of old, glory-seeking Jason, attended by his promising young
lieutenants, Castor and Pollux, embarked on that hardy adventure to
Colchis, the brave planks of the good ship Argos he trod, its model a
swan to behold.

And when Trojan Aeneas wandered West, and discovered the pleasant land
of Latium, it was in the fine craft Bis Taurus that he sailed: its
stern gloriously emblazoned, its prow a leveled spear.

And to the sound of sackbut and psaltery, gliding down the Nile, in the
pleasant shade of its pyramids to welcome mad Mark, Cleopatra was
throned on the cedar quarter-deck of a glorious gondola, silk and satin
hung; its silver plated oars, musical as flutes. So, too, Queen Bess
was wont to disport on old Thames.

And tough Torf-Egill, the Danish Sea-king, reckoned in his stud, a
slender yacht; its masts young Zetland firs; its prow a seal, dog-like
holding a sword-fish blade. He called it the Grayhound, so swift was
its keel; the Sea-hawk, so blood-stained its beak.

And groping down his palace stairs, the blind old Doge Dandolo, oft
embarked in his gilded barge, like the lord mayor setting forth in
civic state from Guildhall in his chariot. But from another sort of
prow leaped Dandolo, when at Constantinople, he foremost sprang ashore,
and with a right arm ninety years old, planted the standard of St. Mark
full among the long chin-pennons of the long-bearded Turks.

And Kumbo Sama, Emperor of Japan, had a dragon-beaked junk, a floating
Juggernaut, wherein he burnt incense to the sea-gods.

And Kannakoko, King of New Zealand; and the first Tahitian Pomaree; and
the Pelew potentate, each possessed long state canoes; sea-snakes, all;
carved over like Chinese card-cases, and manned with such scores of
warriors, that dipping their paddles in the sea, they made a commotion
like shoals of herring.

What wonder then, that Bello of the Hump, the old sea-king of Mardi,
should sport a brave ocean-chariot?

In a broad arbor by the water-side, it was housed like Alp Arsian’s
war-horse, or the charger Caligula deified; upon its stern a wilderness
of sculpture:—shell-work, medal-lions, masques, griffins, gulls, ogres,
finned-lions, winged walruses; all manner of sea-cavalry, crusading
centaurs, crocodiles, and sharks; and mermen, and mermaids, and Neptune
only knows all.

And in this craft, Doge-like, yearly did King Bello stand up and wed
with the Lagoon. But the custom originated not in the manner of the
Doge’s, which was as follows; so, at least, saith Ghibelli, who tells
all about it:—

When, in a stout sea-fight, Ziani defeated Barbarossa’s son Otho,
sending his feluccas all flying, like frightened water-fowl from a
lake, then did his Holiness, the Pope, present unto him a ring; saying,
“Take this, oh Ziani, and with it, the sea for thy bride; and every
year wed her again.”

So the Doge’s tradition; thus Bello’s:—

Ages ago, Dominora was circled by a reef, which expanding in proportion
to the extension of the isle’s naval dominion, in due time embraced the
entire lagoon; and this marriage ring zoned all the world.

But if the sea was King Bello’s bride, an Adriatic Tartar he wedded;
who, in her mad gales of passions, often boxed about his canoes, and
led his navies a very boisterous life indeed.

And hostile prognosticators opined, that ere long she would desert her
old lord, and marry again. Already, they held, she had made advances in
the direction of Vivenza.

But truly, should she abandon old Bello, he would straight-way after
her with all his fleets; and never rest till his queen was regained.

Now, old sea-king! look well to thy barge of state: for, peradventure,
the dry-rot may be eating into its keel; and the wood-worms exploring
into its spars.

Without heedful tending, any craft will decay; yet, for ever may its
first, fine model be preserved, though its prow be renewed every
spring, like the horns of the deer, if, in repairing, plank be put for
plank, rib for rib, in exactest similitude. Even so, then, oh Bello! do
thou with thy barge.




CHAPTER XLVI.
Wherein Babbalanja Bows Thrice


The next morning’s twilight found us once more afloat; and yielding to
that almost sullen feeling, but too apt to prevail with some mortals at
that hour, all but Media long remained silent.

But now, a bright mustering is seen among the myriad white Tartar tents
in the Orient; like lines of spears defiling upon some upland plain,
the sunbeams thwart the sky. And see! amid the blaze of banners, and
the pawings of ten thousand thousand golden hoofs, day’s mounted
Sultan, Xerxes-like, moves on: the Dawn his standard, East and West his
cymbals.

“Oh, morning life!” cried Yoomy, with a Persian air; “would that all
time were a sunrise, and all life a youth.”

“Ah! but these striplings whimper of youth,” said Mohi, caressing his
braids, “as if they wore this beard.”

“But natural, old man,” said Babbalanja. “We Mardians never seem young
to ourselves; childhood is to youth what manhood is to age:—something
to be looked back upon, with sorrow that it is past. But childhood
reeks of no future, and knows no past; hence, its present passes in a
vapor.”

“Mohi, how’s your appetite this morning?” said Media.

“Thus, thus, ye gods,” sighed Yoomy, “is feeling ever scouted. Yet,
what might seem feeling in me, I can not express.”

“A good commentary on old Bardianna, Yoomy,” said Babbalanja, “who
somewhere says, that no Mardian can out with his heart, for his
unyielding ribs are in the way. And indeed, pride, or something akin
thereto, often holds check on sentiment. My lord, there are those who
like not to be detected in the possession of a heart.”

“Very true, Babbalanja; and I suppose that pride was at the bottom of
your old Ponderer’s heartless, unsentimental, bald-pated style.”

“Craving pardon, my lord is deceived. Bardianna was not at all proud;
though he had a queer way of showing the absence of pride. In his
essay, entitled,—“On the Tendency to curl in Upper Lips,” he thus
discourses. “We hear much of pride and its sinfulness in this Mardi
wherein we dwell: whereas, I glory in being brimmed with it;—my sort of
pride. In the presence of kings, lords, palm-trees, and all those who
deem themselves taller than myself, I stand stiff as a pike, and will
abate not one vertebra of my stature. But accounting no Mardian my
superior, I account none my inferior; hence, with the social, I am ever
ready to be sociable.”

“An agrarian!” said Media; “no doubt he would have made the headsman
the minister of equality.”

“At bottom we are already equal, my honored lord,” said Babbalanja,
profoundly bowing—“One way we all come into Mardi, and one way we
withdraw. Wanting his yams a king will starve, quick as a clown; and
smote on the hip, saith old Bardianna, he will roar as loud as the next
one.”

“Roughly worded, that, Babbalanja.—Vee-Vee! my crown!—So; now,
Babbalanja, try if you can not polish Bardianna’s style in that last
saying you father upon him.”

“I will, my ever honorable lord,” said Babbalanja, salaming. “Thus
we’ll word it, then: In their merely Mardian nature, the sublimest
demi-gods are subject to infirmities; for struck by some keen shaft,
even a king ofttimes dons his crown, fearful of future darts.”

“Ha, ha!—well done, Babbalanja; but I bade you polish, not sharpen the
arrow.”

“All one, my thrice honored lord;—to polish is not to blunt.”




CHAPTER XLVII.
Babbalanja Philosophizes, And My Lord Media Passes Round The Calabashes


An interval of silence passed; when Media cried, “Out upon thee, Yoomy!
curtail that long face of thine.”

“How can he, my lord,” said Mohi, “when he is thinking of furlongs?”

“Fathoms you mean, Mohi; see you not he is musing over the gunwale? And
now, minstrel, a banana for thy thoughts. Come, tell me how you poets
spend so many hours in meditation.”

“My lord, it is because, that when we think, we think so little of
ourselves.”

“I thought as much,” said Mohi, “for no sooner do I undertake to be
sociable with myself, than I am straightway forced to beat a retreat.”

“Ay, old man,” said Babbalanja, “many of us Mardians are but sorry
hosts to ourselves. Some hearts are hermits.”

“If not of yourself, then, Yoomy, of whom else do you think?” asked
Media.

“My lord, I seldom think,” said Yoomy, “I but give ear to the voices in
my calm.”

“Did Babbalanja speak?” said Media. “But no more of your reveries;” and
so saying Media gradually sunk into a reverie himself.

The rest did likewise; and soon, with eyes enchanted, all reclined:
gazing at each other, witless of what we did.

It was Media who broke the spell; calling for Vee-Vee our page, his
calabashes and cups, and nectarines for all.

Eyeing his goblet, Media at length threw himself back, and said:
“Babbalanja, not ten minutes since, we were all absent-minded; now, how
would you like to step out of your body, in reality; and, as a spirit,
haunt some shadowy grove?”

“But our lungs are not wholly superfluous, my lord,” said Babbalanja,
speaking loud.

“No, nor our lips,” said Mohi, smacking his over his wine.

“But could you really be disembodied here in Mardi, Babbalanja, how
would you fancy it?” said Media.

“My lord,” said Babbalanja, speaking through half of a nectarine,
“defer putting that question, I beseech, till after my appetite is
satisfied; for, trust me, no hungry mortal would forfeit his palate, to
be resolved into the impalpable.”

“Yet pure spirits we must all become at last, Babbalanja,” said Yoomy,
“even the most ignoble.”

“Yes, so they say, Yoomy; but if all boors be the immortal sires of
endless dynasties of immortals, how little do our pious patricians bear
in mind their magnificent destiny, when hourly they scorn their
companionship. And if here in Mardi they can not abide an equality with
plebeians, even at the altar; how shall they endure them, side by side,
throughout eternity? But since the prophet Alma asserts, that Paradise
is almost entirely made up of the poor and despised, no wonder that
many aristocrats of our isles pursue a career, which, according to some
theologies, must forever preserve the social distinctions so sedulously
maintained in Mardi. And though some say, that at death every thing
earthy is removed from the spirit, so that clowns and lords both stand
on a footing; yet, according to the popular legends, it has ever been
observed of the ghosts of boors when revisiting Mardi, that invariably
they rise in their smocks. And regarding our intellectual equality
here, how unjust, my lord, that after whole years of days end nights
consecrated to the hard gaining of wisdom, the wisest Mardian of us all
should in the end find the whole sum of his attainments, at one leap
outstripped by the veriest dunce, suddenly inspired by light divine.
And though some hold, that all Mardian lore is vain, and that at death
all mysteries will be revealed; yet, none the less, do they toil and
ponder now. Thus, their tongues have one mind, and their understanding
another.”

“My lord,” said Mohi, “we have come to the lees; your pardon,
Babbalanja.”

“Then, Vee-Vee, another calabash! Fill up, Mohi; wash down wine with
wine. Your cup, Babbalanja; any lees?”

“Plenty, my lord; we philosophers come to the lees very soon.”

“Flood them over, then; but cease not discoursing; thanks be to the
gods, your mortal palates and tongues can both wag together; fill up, I
say, Babbalanja; you are no philosopher, if you stop at the tenth cup;
endurance is the test of philosophy all Mardi over; drink, I say, and
make us wise by precept and example.—Proceed, Yoomy, you look as if you
had something to say.”

“Thanks, my lord. Just now, Babbalanja, you flew from the subject;— you
spoke of boors; but has not the lowliest peasant an eye that can take
in the vast horizon at a sweep: mountains, vales, plains, and oceans?
Is such a being nothing?”

“But can that eye see itself, Yoomy?” said Babbalanja, winking. “Taken
out of its socket, will it see at all? Its connection with the body
imparts to it its virtue.”

“He questions every thing,” cried Mohi. “Philosopher, have you a head?”

“I have,” said Babbalanja, feeling for it; “I am finished off at the
helm very much as other Mardians, Mohi.”

“My lord, the first yea that ever came from him.”

“Ah, Mohi,” said Media, “the discourse waxes heavy. I fear me we have
again come to the lees. Ho, Vee-Vee, a fresh calabash; and with it we
will change the subject. Now, Babbalanja, I have this cup to drink, and
then a question to propound. Ah, Mohi, rare old wine this; it smacks of
the cork. But attention, Philosopher. Supposing you had a wife—which,
by the way, you have not—would you deem it sensible in her to imagine
you no more, because you happened to stroll out of her sight?”

“However that might be,” murmured Yoomy, “young Nina bewailed herself a
widow, whenever Arhinoo, her lord, was absent from her side.”

“My lord Media,” said Babbalanja, “During my absence, my wife would
have more reason to conclude that I was not living, than that I was. To
the former supposition, every thing tangible around her would tend; to
the latter, nothing but her own fond fancies. It is this imagination of
ours, my lord, that is at the bottom of these things. When I am in one
place, there exists no other. Yet am I but too apt to fancy the
reverse. Nevertheless, when I am in Odo, talk not to me of Ohonoo. To
me it is not, except when I am there. If it be, prove it. To prove it,
you carry me thither but you only prove, that to its substantive
existence, as cognizant to me, my presence is indispensable. I say
that, to me, all Mardi exists by virtue of my sovereign pleasure; and
when I die, the universe will perish with me.”

“Come you of a long-lived race,” said Mohi, “one free from apoplexies?
I have many little things to accomplish yet, and would not be left in
the lurch.”

“Heed him not, Babbalanja,” said Media. “Dip your beak again, my eagle,
and soar.”

“Let us be eagles, then, indeed, my lord: eagle-like, let us look at
this red wine without blinking; let us grow solemn, not boisterous,
with good cheer.”

Then, lifting his cup, “My lord, serenely do I pity all who are stirred
one jot from their centers by ever so much drinking of this fluid. Ply
him hard as you will, through the live-long polar night, a wise man can
not be made drunk. Though, toward sunrise, his body may reel, it will
reel round its center; and though he make many tacks in going home, he
reaches it at last; while scores of over-plied fools are foundering by
the way. My lord, when wild with much thought, ’tis to wine I fly, to
sober me; its magic fumes breathe over me like the Indian summer, which
steeps all nature in repose. To me, wine is no vulgar fire, no fosterer
of base passions; my heart, ever open, is opened still wider; and
glorious visions are born in my brain; it is then that I have all Mardi
under my feet, and the constellations of the firmament in my soul.”

“Superb!” cried Yoomy.

“Pooh, pooh!” said Mohi, “who does not see stars at such times? I see
the Great Bear now, and the little one, its cub; and Andromeda, and
Perseus’ chain-armor, and Cassiopea in her golden chair, and the
bright, scaly Dragon, and the glittering Lyre, and all the jewels in
Orion’s sword-hilt.”

“Ay,” cried Media, “the study of astronomy is wonderfully facilitated
by wine. Fill up, old Ptolemy, and tell us should you discover a new
planet. Methinks this fluid needs stirring. Ho, Vee-Vee, my scepter! be
we sociable. But come, Babbalanja, my gold-headed aquila, return to
your theme;—the imagination, if you please.”

“Well, then, my lord, I was about to say, that the imagination is the
Voli-Donzini; or, to speak plainer, the unical, rudimental, and all-
comprehending abstracted essence of the infinite remoteness of things.
Without it, we were grass-hoppers.”

“And with it, you mortals are little else; do you not chirp all over,
Mohi? By my demi-god soul, were I not what I am, this wine would almost
get the better of me.”

“Without it—” continued Babbalanja.

“Without what?” demanded Media, starting to his feet. “This wine?
Traitor, I’ll stand by this to the last gasp, you are inebriated,
Babbalanja.”

“Perhaps so, my lord; but I was treating of the imagination, may it
please you.”

“My lord,” added Mohi, “of the unical, and rudimental fundament of
things, you remember.”

“Ah! there’s none of them sober; proceed, proceed, Azzageddi!”

“My lord waves his hand like a banner,” murmured Yoomy.

“Without imagination, I say, an armless man, born, blind, could not be
made to believe, that he had a head of hair, since he could neither see
it, nor feel it, nor has hair any feeling of itself.”

“Methinks though,” said Mohi, “if the cripple had a Tartar for a wife,
he would not remain skeptical long.”

“You all fly off at tangents,” cried Media, “but no wonder: your mortal
brains can not endure much quaffing. Return to your subject,
Babbalanja. Assume now, Babbalanja,—assume, my dear prince—assume it,
assume it, I say!—Why don’t you?”

“I am willing to assume any thing you please, my lord: what is it?”

“Ah! yes!—Assume that—that upon returning home, you should find your
wife had newly wedded, under the—the—the metaphysical presumption, that
being no longer visible, you—_you_ Azzageddi, had departed this life;
in other words, out of sight, out of mind; what then, my dear prince?”

“Why then, my lord, I would demolish my rival in a trice.”

“Would you?—then—then so much for your metaphysics, Bab—Babbalanja.”

Babbalanja rose to his feet, muttering to himself—“Is this assumed, or
real?—Can a demi-god be mastered by wine? Yet, the old mythologies make
bacchanals of the gods. But he was wondrous keen! He felled me, ere he
fell himself.”

“Yoomy, my lord Media is in a very merry mood to-day,” whispered Mohi,
“but his counterfeit was not well done. No, no, a bacchanal is not used
to be so logical in his cups.”




CHAPTER XLVIII.
They Sail Round An Island Without Landing; And Talk Round A Subject
Without Getting At It


Purposing a visit to Kaleedoni, a country integrally united to
Dominora, our course now lay northward along the western white cliffs
of the isle. But finding the wind ahead, and the current too strong for
our paddlers, we were fain to forego our destination; Babbalanja
observing, that since in Dominora we had not found Yillah, then in
Kaleedoni the maiden could not be lurking.

And now, some conversation ensued concerning the country we were
prevented from visiting. Our chronicler narrated many fine things of
its people; extolling their bravery in war, their amiability in peace,
their devotion in religion, their penetration in philosophy, their
simplicity and sweetness in song, their loving-kindness and frugality
in all things domestic:—running over a long catalogue of heroes,
meta-physicians, bards, and good men.

But as all virtues are convertible into vices, so in some cases did the
best traits of these people degenerate. Their frugality too often
became parsimony; their devotion grim bigotry; and all this in a
greater degree perhaps than could be predicated of the more immediate
subjects of King Bello.

In Kaleedoni was much to awaken the fervor of its bards. Upland and
lowland were full of the picturesque; and many unsung lyrics yet lurked
in her glens. Among her blue, heathy hills, lingered many tribes, who
in their wild and tattooed attire, still preserved the garb of the
mightiest nation of old times. They bared the knee, in token that it
was honorable as the face, since it had never been bent.

While Braid-Beard was recounting these things, the currents were
sweeping us over a strait, toward a deep green island, bewitching to
behold.

Not greener that midmost terrace of the Andes, which under a torrid
meridian steeps fair Quito in the dews of a perpetual spring;—not
greener the nine thousand feet of Pirohitee’s tall peak, which, rising
from out the warm bosom of Tahiti, carries all summer with it into the
clouds;—nay, not greener the famed gardens of Cyrus,—than the vernal
lawn, the knoll, the dale of beautiful Verdanna.

“Alas, sweet isle! Thy desolation is overrun with vines,” sighed Yoomy,
gazing.

“Land of caitiff curs!” cried Media.

“Isle, whose future is in its past. Hearth-stone, from which its
children run,” said Babbalanja.

“I can not read thy chronicles for blood, Verdanna,” murmured Mohi.

Gliding near, we would have landed, but the rolling surf forbade. Then
thrice we circumnavigated the isle for a smooth, clear beach; but it
was not found.

Meanwhile all still conversed.

“My lord,” said Yoomy, “while we tarried with King Bello, I heard much
of the feud between Dominora and this unhappy shore. Yet is not
Verdanna as a child of King Bello’s?”

“Yes, minstrel, a step-child,” said Mohi.

“By way of enlarging his family circle,” said Babbalanja, “an old lion
once introduced a deserted young stag to his den; but the stag never
became domesticated, and would still charge upon his foster-brothers.
—Verdanna is not of the flesh and blood of Dominora, whence, in good
part, these dissensions.”

“But Babbalanja, is there no way of reconciling these foes?”

“But one way, Yoomy:—By filling up this strait with dry land; for,
divided by water, we Mardians must ever remain more or less divided at
heart. Though Kaleedoni was united to Dominora long previous to the
union of Verdanna, yet Kaleedoni occasions Bello no disquiet; for,
geographically one, the two populations insensibly blend at the point
of junction. No hostile strait flows between the arms, that to embrace
must touch.”

“But, Babbalanja,” said Yoomy, “what asks Verdanna of Dominora, that
Verdanna so clamors at the denial?”

“They are arrant cannibals, Yoomy,” said Media, “and desire the
privilege of eating each other up.”

“King Bello’s idea,” said Babbalanja; “but, in these things, my lord,
you demi-gods are ever unanimous. But, whatever be Verdanna’s demands,
Bello persists in rejecting them.”

“Why not grant every thing she asks, even to renouncing all claim upon
the isle,” said Mohi; “for thus, Bello would rid himself of many
perplexities.”

“And think you, old man,” said Media, “that, bane or blessing, Bello
will yield his birthright? Will a tri-crowned king resign his triple
diadem? And even did Bello what you propose he would only breed still
greater perplexities. For if granted, full soon would Verdanna be glad
to surrender many things she demands. And all she now asks, she has had
in times past; but without turning it to advantage:—and is she wiser
now?”

“Does she not demand her harvests, my lord?” said Yoomy, “and has not
the reaper a right to his sheaf?”

“Cant! cant! Yoomy. If you reap for me, the sheaf is mine.”

“But if the reaper reaps on his own harvest-field, whose then the
sheaf, my lord?” said Babbalanja.

“His for whom he reaps—his lord’s!”

“Then let the reaper go with sickle and with sword,” said Yoomy, “with
one hand, cut down the bearded grain; and with the other, smite his
bearded lords.”

“Thou growest fierce, in thy lyric moods, my warlike dove,” said
‘Media, blandly. “But for thee, philosopher, know thou, that Verdanna’s
men are of blood and brain inferior to Bello’s native race; and the
better Mardian must ever rule.”

“Verdanna inferior to Dominora, my lord!—Has she produced no bards, no
orators, no wits, no patriots? Mohi, unroll thy chronicles! Tell me, if
Verdanna may not claim full many a star along King Bello’s tattooed arm
of Fame?

“Even so,” said Mohi. “Many chapters bear you out.”

“But my lord,” said Babbalanja, “as truth, omnipresent, lurks in all
things, even in lies: so, does some germ of it lurk in the calumnies
heaped on the people of this land. For though they justly boast of many
lustrous names, these jewels gem no splendid robe. And though like a
bower of grapes, Verdanna is full of gushing juices, spouting out in
bright sallies of wit, yet not all her grapes make wine; and here and
there, hang goodly clusters mildewed; or half devoured by worms, bred
in their own tendrils.”

“Drop, drop your grapes and metaphors!” cried Media. “Bring forth your
thoughts like men; let them come naked into Mardi.—What do you mean,
Babbalanja?”

“This, my lord, Verdanna’s worst evils are her own, not of another’s
giving. Her own hand is her own undoer. She stabs herself with bigotry,
superstition, divided councils, domestic feuds, ignorance, temerity;
she wills, but does not; her East is one black storm-cloud, that never
bursts; her utmost fight is a defiance; she showers reproaches, where
she should rain down blows. She stands a mastiff baying at the moon.”

“Tropes on tropes!” said. Media. “Let me tell the tale,—straight-
forward like a line. Verdanna is a lunatic—”

“A trope! my lord,” cried Babbalanja.

“My tropes are not tropes,” said Media, “but yours are.—Verdanna is a
lunatic, that after vainly striving to cut another’s throat, grimaces
before a standing pool and threatens to cut his own. And is such a
madman to be intrusted with himself? No; let another govern him, who is
ungovernable to himself Ay, and tight hold the rein; and curb, and rasp
the bit. Do I exaggerate?—Mohi, tell me, if, save one lucid interval,
Verdanna, while independent of Dominora, ever discreetly conducted her
affairs? Was she not always full of fights and factions? And what first
brought her under the sway of Bello’s scepter? Did not her own Chief
Dermoddi fly to Bello’s ancestor for protection against his own
seditious subjects? And thereby did not her own king unking himself?
What wonder, then, and where the wrong, if Henro, Bello’s conquering
sire, seized the diadem?”

“What my lord cites is true,” said Mohi, “but cite no more, I pray;
lest, you harm your cause.”

“Yet for all this, Babbalanja,” said Media, “Bello but holds lunatic
Verdanna’s lands in trust.”

“And may the guardian of an estate also hold custody of the ward, my
lord?”

“Ay, if he can. What _can_ be done, may be: that’s the Greed of demi-
gods.”

“Alas, alas!” cried Yoomy, “why war with words over this poor,
suffering land. See! for all her bloom, her people starve; perish her
yams, ere taken from the soil; the blight of heaven seems upon them.”

“Not so,” said Media. “Heaven sends no blights. Verdanna will not
learn. And if from one season’s rottenss, rottenness they sow again,
rottenness must they reap. But Yoomy, you seem earnest in this
matter;—come: on all hands it is granted that evils exist in Verdanna;
now sweet Sympathizer, what must the royal Bello do to mend them?”

“I am no sage,” said Yoomy, “what would my lord Media do?”

“What would _you_ do, Babbalanja,” said Media.

“Mohi, what you?” asked the philosopher.

“And what would the company do?” added Mohi.

“Now, though these evils pose us all,” said Babbalanja, “there lately
died in Verdanna, one, who set about curing them in a humane and
peaceable way, waving war and bloodshed. That man was Konno. Under a
huge caldron, he kept a roaring fire.”

“Well, Azzageddi, how could that answer his purpose?” asked Media.

“Nothing better, my lord. His fire boiled his bread-fruit; and so
convinced were his countrymen, that he was well employed, that they
almost stripped their scanty orchards to fill his caldron.”

“Konno was a knave,” said Mohi.

“Your pardon, old man, but that is only known to his ghost, not to us.
At any rate he was a great man; for even assuming he cajoled his
country, no common man could have done it.”

“Babbalanja,” said Mohi, “my lord has been pleased to pronounce
Verdanna crazy; now, may not her craziness arise from the irritating,
tantalizing practices of Dominora?”

“Doubtless, Braid-Beard, many of the extravagances of Verdanna, are in
good part to be ascribed to the cause you mention; but, to be
impartial, none the less does Verdanna essay to taunt and provoke
Dominora; yet not with the like result. Perceive you, Braid-Beard, that
the trade-wind blows dead across this strait from Dominora, and not
from Verdanna? Hence, when King Bello’s men fling gibes and insults,
every missile hits; but those of Verdanna are blown back in its teeth:
her enemies jeering her again and again.”

“King Bello’s men are dastards for that,” cried Yoomy. “It shows
neither sense, nor spirit, nor humanity,” said Babbalanja.

“All wide of the mark,” cried Media. “What is to be done for Verdanna?”

“What will she do for herself?” said Babbalanja.

“Philosopher, you are an extraordinary sage; and since sages should be
seers, reveal Verdanna’s future.”

“My lord, you will ever find true prophets, prudent; nor will any
prophet risk his reputation upon predicting aught concerning this land.
The isles are Oro’s. Nevertheless, he who doctors Verdanna aright, will
first medicine King Bello; who in some things is, himself a patient,
though he would fain be a physician. However, my lord, there is a demon
of a doctor in Mardi, who at last deals with these desperate cases. He
employs only pills, picked off the Conroupta Quiancensis tree.”

“And what sort of a vegetable is that?” asked Mohi. “Consult the
botanists,” said Babbalanja.




CHAPTER XLIX.
They Draw Nigh To Porpheero; Where They Behold A Terrific Eruption


Gliding away from Verdanna at the turn of the tide, we cleared the
strait, and gaining the more open lagoon, pointed our prows for
Porpheero, from whose magnificent monarchs my lord Media promised
himself a glorious reception.

“They are one and all demi-gods,” he cried, “and have the old demi-god
feeling. We have seen no great valleys like theirs:—their scepters are
long as our spears; to their sumptuous palaces, Donjalolo’s are but
inns:—their banquetting halls are as vistas; no generations run
parallel to theirs:—their pedigrees reach back into chaos.

“Babbalanja! here you will find food for philosophy:—the whole land
checkered with nations, side by side contrasting in costume, manners,
and mind. Here you will find science and sages; manuscripts in miles;
bards singing in choirs.

“Mohi! here you will flag over your page; in Porpheero the ages have
hived all their treasures: like a pyramid, the past shadows over the
land.

“Yoomy! here you will find stuff for your songs:—blue rivers flowing
through forest arches, and vineyards; velvet meads, soft as ottomans:
bright maidens braiding the golden locks of the harvest; and a
background of mountains, that seem the end of the world. Or if nature
will not content you, then turn to the landscapes of art. See! mosaic
walls, tattooed like our faces; paintings, vast as horizons; and into
which, you feel you could rush: See! statues to which you could off
turban; cities of columns standing thick as mankind; and firmanent
domes forever shedding their sunsets of gilding: See! spire behind
spire, as if the land were the ocean, and all Bello’s great navy were
riding at anchor.

“Noble Taji! you seek for your Yillah;—give over despair! Porpheero’s
such a scene of enchantment, that there, the lost maiden must lurk.”

“A glorious picture!” cried Babbalanja, but turn the medal, my lord;—
what says the reverse?”

“Cynic! have done.—But bravo! we’ll ere long be in Franko, the
goodliest vale of them all; how I long to take her old king by the
hand!”

The sun was now setting behind us, lighting up the white cliffs of
Dominora, and the green capes of Verdanna; while in deep shade lay
before us the long winding shores of Porpheero.

It was a sunset serene.

“How the winds lowly warble in the dying day’s ear,” murmured Yoomy.

“A mild, bright night, we’ll have,” said Media.

“See you not those clouds over Franko, my lord,” said Mohi, shaking his
head.

“Ah, aged and weather-wise as ever, sir chronicler;—I predict a fair
night, and many to follow.”

“Patience needs no prophet,” said Babbalanja. “The night, is at hand.”

Hitherto the lagoon had been smooth: but anon, it grew black, and
stirred; and out of the thick darkness came clamorous sounds. Soon,
there shot into the air a vivid meteor, which bursting at the zenith,
radiated down the firmament in fiery showers, leaving treble darkness
behind.

Then as all held their breath, from Franko there spouted an eruption,
which seemed to plant all Mardi in the foreground.

As when Vesuvius lights her torch, and in the blaze, the storm-swept
surges in Naples’ bay rear and plunge toward it; so now, showed
Franko’s multitudes, as they stormed the summit where their monarch’s
palace blazed, fast by the burning mountain.

“By my eternal throne!” cried Media, starting, “the old volcano has
burst forth again!”

“But a new vent, my lord,” said Babbalanja.

“More fierce this, than the eruption which happened in my youth,” said
Mohi—“methinks that Franko’s end has come.”

“You look pale, my lord,” said Babbalanja, “while all other faces
glow;—Yoomy, doff that halo in the presence of a king.”

Over the waters came a rumbling sound, mixed with the din of warfare,
and thwarted by showers of embers that fell not, for the whirling
blasts.

“Off shore! off shore!” cried Media; and with all haste we gained a
place of safety.

Down the valley now poured Rhines and Rhones of lava, a fire-freshet,
flooding the forests from their fastnesses, and leaping with them into
the seething sea.

The shore was lined with multitudes pushing off wildly in canoes.

Meantime, the fiery storm from Franko, kindled new flames in the
distant valleys of Porpheero; while driven over from Verdanna came
frantic shouts, and direful jubilees. Upon Dominora a baleful glare was
resting.

“Thrice cursed flames!” cried Media. “Is Mardi to be one conflagration?
How it crackles, forks, and roars!—Is this our funeral pyre?”

“Recline, recline, my lord,” said Babbalanja. “Fierce flames are ever
brief—a song, sweet Yoomy! Your pipe, old Mohi! Greater fires than this
have ere now blazed in Mardi. Let us be calm;—the isles were made to
burn;—Braid-Beard! hereafter, in some quiet cell, of this whole scene
you will but make one chapter;—come, digest it now.”

“My face is scorched,” cried Media.

“The last, last day!” cried Mohi.

“Not so, old man,” said Babbalanja, “when that day dawns, ’twill dawn
serene. Be calm, be calm, my potent lord.”

“Talk not of calm brows in storm-time!” cried Media fiercely. “See! how
the flames blow over upon Dominora!”

“Yet the fires they kindle there are soon extinguished,” said
Babbalanja. “No, no; Dominora ne’er can burn with Franko’s fires; only
those of her own kindling may consume her.”

“Away! Away!” cried Media. “We may not touch Porpheero now.—Up sails!
and westward be our course.”

So dead before the blast, we scudded.

Morning broke, showing no sign of land.

“Hard must it go with Franko’s king,” said Media, “when his people rise
against him with the red volcanoes. Oh, for a foot to crush them! Hard,
too, with all who rule in broad Porpheero. And may she we seek, survive
this conflagration!”

“My lord,” said Babbalanja, “where’ere she hide, ne’er yet did Yillah
lurk in this Porpheero; nor have we missed the maiden, noble Taji! in
not touching at its shores.”

“This fire must make a desert of the land,” said Mohi; “burn up and
bury all her tilth.”

“Yet, Mohi, vineyards flourish over buried villages,” murmured Yoomy.

“True, minstrel,” said Babbalanja, “and prairies are purified by fire.
Ashes breed loam. Nor can any skill make the same surface forever
fruitful. In all times past, things have been overlaid; and though the
first fruits of the marl are wild and poisonous, the palms at last
spring forth; and once again the tribes repose in shade. My lord, if
calms breed storms, so storms calms; and all this dire commotion must
eventuate in peace. It may be, that Perpheero’s future has been cheaply
won.”




CHAPTER L.
Wherein King Media Celebrates The Glories Of Autumn, The Minstrel, The
Promise Of Spring


“Ho, now!” cried Media, “across the wide waters, for that New Mardi,
Vivenza! Let us indeed see, whether she who eludes us elsewhere, he at
last found in Vivenza’s vales.”

“There or nowhere, noble Taji,” said Yoomy.

“Be not too sanguine, gentle Yoomy,” said Babbalanja.

“Does Yillah choose rather to bower in the wild wilderness of Vivenza,
than in the old vineyards of Porpheero?” said Braid-Beard.

Sang Yoomy:—
Her bower is not of the vine,
But the wild, wild eglantine!
Not climbing a moldering arch,
But upheld by the fir-green larch.
    Old ruins she flies:
    To new valleys she hies:—
    Not the hoar, moss-wood,
    Ivied trees each a rood—
    Not in Maramma she dwells,
    Hollow with hermit cells.

        ’Tis a new, new isle!
        An infant’s its smile,
            Soft-rocked by the sea.
        Its bloom all in bud;
        No tide at its flood,
            In that fresh-born sea!

Spring! Spring! where she dwells,
In her sycamore dells,
Where Mardi is young and new:
Its verdure all eyes with dew.

There, there! in the bright, balmy morns,
The young deer sprout their horns,
Deep-tangled in new-branching groves,
Where the Red-Rover Robin roves,—

            Stooping his crest,
            To his molting breast—
        Rekindling the flambeau there!
    Spring! Spring! where she dwells,
    In her sycamore dells:—
    Where, fulfilling their fates,
    All creatures seek mates—
        The thrush, the doe, and the hare!


“Thou art most musical, sweet Yoomy,” said Media. “concerning this
spring-land Vivenza. But are not the old autumnal valleys of Porpheero
more glorious than those of vernal Vivenza? Vivenza shows no trophies
of the summer time, but Dominora’s full-blown rose hangs blushing on
her garden walls; her autumn groves are glory-dyed.”

“My lord, autumn soon merges in winter, but the spring has all the
seasons before. The full-blown rose is nearer withering than the bud.
The faint morn is a blossom: the crimson sunset the flower.”




CHAPTER LI.
In Which Azzageddi Seems To Use Babbalanja For A Mouth-Piece


Porpheero far astern, the spirits of the company rose. Once again, old
Mohi serenely unbraided, and rebraided his beard; and sitting Turk-wise
on his mat, my lord Media smoking his gonfalon, diverted himself with
the wild songs of Yoomy, the wild chronicles of Mohi, or the still
wilder speculations of Babbalanja; now and then, as from pitcher to
pitcher, pouring royal old wine down his soul.

Among other things, Media, who at times turned over Babbalanja for an
encyclopaedia, however unreliable, demanded information upon the
subject of neap tides and their alleged slavish vassalage to the moon.

When true to his cyclopaediatic nature, Babbalanja quoted from a still
older and better authority than himself; in brief, from no other than
eternal Bardianna. It seems that that worthy essayist had discussed the
whole matter in a chapter thus headed: “On Seeing into Mysteries
through Mill-Stones;“ and throughout his disquisitions he evinced such
a profundity of research, though delivered in a style somewhat
equivocal, that the company were much struck by the erudition
displayed.

“Babbalanja, that Bardianna of yours must have been a wonderful
student,” said Media after a pause, “no doubt he consumed whole
thickets of rush-lights.”

“Not so, my lord.—‘Patience, patience, philosophers,’ said Bardianna;
‘blow out your tapers, bolt not your dinners, take time, wisdom will be
plenty soon.’”

“A notable hint! Why not follow it, Babbalanja?”

“Because, my lord, I have overtaken it, and passed on.”

“True to your nature, Babbalanja; you stay nowhere.”

“Ay, keep moving is my motto; but speaking of hard students, did my
lord ever hear of Midni the ontologist and entomologist?”

“No.”

“Then, my lord, you shall hear of him now. Midni was of opinion that
day-light was vulgar; good enough for taro-planting and traveling; but
wholly unadapted to the sublime ends of study. He toiled by night; from
sunset to sunrise poring over the works of the old logicans. Like most
philosophers, Midni was an amiable man; but one thing invariably put
him out. He read in the woods by glow-worm light; insect in hand,
tracing over his pages, line by line. But glow-worms burn not long: and
in the midst of some calm intricate thought, at some imminent comma,
the insect often expired, and Midni groped for a meaning. Upon such an
occasion, ‘Ho, Ho,’ he cried; ‘but for one instant of sun-light to see
my way to a period!’ But sun-light there was none; so Midni sprang to
his feet, and parchment under arm, raced about among the sloughs and
bogs for another glow-worm. Often, making a rapid descent with his
turban, he thought he had caged a prize; but nay. Again he tried; yet
with no better succcess. Nevertheless, at last he secured one; but
hardly had he read three lines by its light, when out it went. Again
and again this occurred. And thus he forever went halting and stumbling
through his studies, and plunging through his quagmires after a glim.”

At this ridiculous tale, one of our silliest paddlers burst into
uncontrollable mirth. Offended at which breach of decorum, Media
sharply rebuked him.

But he protested he could not help laughing.

Again Media was about to reprimand him, when Babbalanja begged leave to
interfere.

“My lord, he is not to blame. Mark how earnestly he struggles to
suppress his mirth; but he can not. It has often been the same with
myself. And many a time have I not only vainly sought to check my
laughter, but at some recitals I have both laughed and cried. But can
opposite emotions be simultaneous in one being? No. I wanted to weep;
but my body wanted to smile, and between us we almost choked. My lord
Media, this man’s body laughs; not the man himself.”

“But his body is his own, Babbalanja; and he should have it under
better control.”

“The common error, my lord. Our souls belong to our bodies, not our
bodies to our souls. For which has the care of the other? which keeps
house? which looks after the replenishing of the aorta and auricles,
and stores away the secretions? Which toils and ticks while the other
sleeps? Which is ever giving timely hints, and elderly warnings? Which
is the most authoritative?—Our bodies, surely. At a hint, you must
move; at a notice to quit, you depart. Simpletons show us, that a body
can get along almost without a soul; but of a soul getting along
without a body, we have no tangible and indisputable proof. My lord,
the wisest of us breathe involuntarily. And how many millions there are
who live from day to day by the incessant operation of subtle processes
in them, of which they know nothing, and care less? Little ween they,
of vessels lacteal and lymphatic, of arteries femoral and temporal; of
pericranium or pericardium; lymph, chyle, fibrin, albumen, iron in the
blood, and pudding in the head; they live by the charity of their
bodies, to which they are but butlers. I say, my lord, our bodies are
our betters. A soul so simple, that it prefers evil to good, is lodged
in a frame, whose minutest action is full of unsearchable wisdom.
Knowing this superiority of theirs, our bodies are inclined to be
willful: our beards grow in spite of us; and as every one knows, they
sometimes grow on dead men.”

“You mortals are alive, then, when you are dead, Babbalanja.”

“No, my lord; but our beards survive us.”

“An ingenious distinction; go on, philosopher.”

“Without bodies, my lord, we Mardians would be minus our strongest
motive-passions, those which, in some way or other, root under our
every action. Hence, without bodies, we must be something else than we
essentially are. Wherefore, that saying imputed to Alma, and which, by
his very followers, is deemed the most hard to believe of all his
instructions, and the most at variance with all preconceived notions of
immortality, I Babbalanja, account the most reasonable of his doctrinal
teachings. It is this;—that at the last day, every man shall rise in
the flesh.”

“Pray, Babbalanja, talk not of resurrections to a demi-god.”

“Then let me rehearse a story, my lord. You will find it in the ‘Very
Merry Marvelings’ of the Improvisitor Quiddi; and a quaint book it is.
Fugle-fi is its finis:—fugle-fi, fugle-fo, fugle-fogle-orum!”

“That wild look in his eye again,” murmured Yoomy. “Proceed,
Azzageddi,” said Media.

“The philosopher Grando had a sovereign contempt for his carcass. Often
he picked a quarrel with it; and always was flying out in its
disparagement. ‘Out upon you, you beggarly body! you clog, drug, drag!
You keep me from flying; I could get along better without you. Out upon
you, I say, you vile pantry, cellar, sink, sewer; abominable body! what
vile thing are you not? And think you, beggar! to have the upper hand
of me? Make a leg to that man if you dare, without my permission. This
smell is intolerable; but turn from it, if you can, unless I give the
word. Bolt this yam!—it is done. Carry me across yon field!—off we go.
Stop!—it’s a dead halt. There, I’ve trained you enough for to-day; now,
sirrah, crouch down in the shade, and be quiet.—I’m rested. So, here’s
for a stroll, and a reverie homeward:— Up, carcass, and march.’ So the
carcass demurely rose and paced, and the philosopher meditated. He was
intent upon squaring the circle; but bump he came against a bough. ‘How
now, clodhopping bumpkin! you would take advantage of my reveries,
would you? But I’ll be even with you;’ and seizing a cudgel, he laid
across his shoulders with right good will. But one of his backhanded
thwacks injured his spinal cord; the philosopher dropped; but presently
came to. ‘Adzooks! I’ll bend or break you! Up, up, and I’ll run you
home for this.’ But wonderful to tell, his legs refused to budge; all
sensation had left them. But a huge wasp happening to sting his foot,
not him, for he felt it not, the leg incontinently sprang into the air,
and of itself, cut all manner of capers. Be still! Down with you!’ But
the leg refused. ‘My arms are still loyal,’ thought Grando; and with
them he at last managed to confine his refractory member. But all
commands, volitions, and persuasions, were as naught to induce his
limbs to carry him home. It was a solitary place; and five days after,
Grando the philosopher was found dead under a tree.”

“Ha, ha!” laughed Media, “Azzageddi is full as merry as ever.”

“But, my lord,” continued Babbalanja, “some creatures have still more
perverse bodies than Grando’s. In the fables of Ridendiabola, this is
to be found. ‘A fresh-water Polyp, despising its marine existence;
longed to live upon air. But all it could do, its tentacles or arms
still continued to cram its stomach. By a sudden preternatural impulse,
however, the Polyp at last turned itself inside out; supposing that
after such a proceeding it would have no gastronomic interior. But its
body proved ventricle outside as well as in. Again its arms went to
work; food was tossed in, and digestion continued.’”

“Is the literal part of that a fact?” asked Mohi.

“True as truth,” said Babbalanja; “the Polyp will live turned inside
out.”

“Somewhat curious, certainly,” said Media.—“But me-thinks, Babbalanja,
that somewhere I have heard something about organic functions, so
called; which may account for the phenomena you mention; and I have
heard too, me-thinks, of what are called reflex actions of the nerves,
which, duly considered, might deprive of its strangeness that story of
yours concerning Grande and his body.”

“Mere substitutions of sounds for inexplicable meanings, my lord. In
some things science cajoles us. Now, what is undeniable of the Polyp
some physiologists analogically maintain with regard to us Mardians;
that forasmuch, as the lining of our interiors is nothing more than a
continuation of the epidermis, or scarf-skin, therefore, that in a
remote age, we too must have been turned wrong side out: an hypothesis,
which, indirectly might account for our moral perversities: and also,
for that otherwise nonsensical term—‘the coat of the stomach;’ for
originally it must have been a surtout, instead of an inner garment.”

“Pray, Azzageddi,” said Media, “are you not a fool?”

“One of a jolly company, my lord; but some creatures besides wearing
their surtouts within, sport their skeletons without: witness the
lobster and turtle, who alive, study their own anatomies.”

“Azzageddi, you are a zany.”

“Pardon, my lord,” said Mohi, “I think him more of a lobster; it’s hard
telling his jaws from his claws.”

“Yes, Braid-Beard, I am a lobster, a mackerel, any thing you please;
but my ancestors were kangaroos, not monkeys, as old Boddo erroneously
opined. My idea is more susceptible of demonstration than his. Among
the deepest discovered land fossils, the relics of kangaroos are
discernible, but no relics of men. Hence, there were no giants in those
days; but on the contrary, kangaroos; and those kangaroos formed the
first edition of mankind, since revised and corrected.”

“What has become of our finises, or tails, then?” asked Mohi, wriggling
in his seat.

“The old question, Mohi. But where are the tails of the tadpoles, after
their gradual metamorphosis into frogs? Have frogs any tails, old man?
Our tails, Mohi, were worn off by the process of civilization;
especially at the period when our fathers began to adopt the sitting
posture: the fundamental evidence of all civilization, for neither
apes, nor savages, can be said to sit; invariably, they squat on their
hams. Among barbarous tribes benches and settles are unknown. But, my
lord Media, as your liege and loving subject I can not sufficiently
deplore the deprivation of your royal tail. That stiff and vertebrated
member, as we find it in those rustic kinsmen we have disowned, would
have been useful as a supplement to your royal legs; and whereas my
good lord is now fain to totter on two stanchions, were he only a
kangaroo, like the monarchs of old, the majesty of Odo would be
dignified, by standing firm on a tripod.”

“A very witty conceit! But have a care, Azzageddi; your theory applies
not to me.”

“Babbalanja,” said Mohi, “you must be the last of the kangaroos.”

“I am, Mohi.”

“But the old fashioned pouch or purse of your grandams?” hinted Media.

“My lord, I take it, that must have been transferred; nowadays our sex
carries the purse.”

“Ha, ha!”

“My lord, why this mirth? Let us be serious. Although man is no longer
a kangaroo, he may be said to be an inferior species of plant. Plants
proper are perhaps insensible of the circulation of their sap: we
mortals are physically unconscious of the circulation of the blood; and
for many ages were not even aware of the fact. Plants know nothing of
their interiors:—three score years and ten we trundle about ours, and
never get a peep at them; plants stand on their stalks:—we stalk on our
legs; no plant flourishes over its dead root:—dead in the grave, man
lives no longer above ground; plants die without food:—so we. And now
for the difference. Plants elegantly inhale nourishment, without
looking it up: like lords, they stand still and are served; and though
green, never suffer from the colic:—whereas, we mortals must forage all
round for our food: we cram our insides; and are loaded down with
odious sacks and intestines. Plants make love and multiply; but excel
us in all amorous enticements, wooing and winning by soft pollens and
essences. Plants abide in one place, and live: we must travel or die.
Plants flourish without us: we must perish without them.”

“Enough Azzageddi!” cried Media. “Open not thy lips till to-morrow.”




CHAPTER LII.
The Charming Yoomy Sings


The morrow came; and three abreast, with snorting prows, we raced
along; our mat-sails panting to the breeze. All present partook of the
life of the air; and unanimously Yoomy was called upon for a song. The
canoes were passing a long, white reef, sparkling with shells, like a
jeweler’s case: and thus Yoomy sang in the same old strain as of yore;
beginning aloud, where he had left off in his soul:—

        Her sweet, sweet mouth!
    The peach-pearl shell:—
Red edged its lips,
    That softly swell,
Just oped to speak,
With blushing cheek,
    That fisherman
With lonely spear
    On the reef ken,
And lift to ear
Its voice to hear,—
    Soft sighing South!
Like this, like this,—
The rosy kiss!—
    That maiden’s mouth.
A shell! a shell!
A vocal shell!
    Song-dreaming,
In its inmost dell!

Her bosom! Two buds half blown, they tell;
A little valley between perfuming;
            That roves away,
            Deserting the day,—
    The day of her eyes illuming;—
That roves away, o’er slope and fell,
Till a soft, soft meadow becomes the dell.


Thus far, old Mohi had been wriggling about in his seat, twitching his
beard, and at every couplet looking up expectantly, as if he desired
the company to think, that he was counting upon that line as the last;
But now, starting to his feet, he exclaimed, “Hold, minstrel! thy
muse’s drapery is becoming disordered: no more!”

“Then no more it shall be,” said Yoomy, “But you have lost a glorious
sequel.”




CHAPTER LIII.
They Draw Nigh Unto Land


In good time, after many days sailing, we snuffed the land from afar,
and came to a great country, full of inland mountains, north and south
stretching far out of sight. “All hail, Kolumbo!” cried Yoomy.

Coasting by a portion of it, which Mohi called Kanneeda, a province of
King Bello’s, we perceived the groves rocking in the wind; their
flexible boughs bending like bows; and the leaves flying forth, and
darkening the landscape, like flocks of pigeons.

“Those groves must soon fall,” said Mohi.

“Not so,” said Babbalanja. “My lord, as these violent gusts are formed
by the hostile meeting of two currents, one from over the lagoon, the
other from land; they may be taken as significant of the occasional
variances between Kanneeda and Dominora.”

“Ay,” said Media, “and as Mohi hints, the breeze from Dominora must
soon overthrow the groves of Kanneeda.”

“Not if the land-breeze holds, my lord;—one breeze oft blows another
home.—Stand up, and gaze! From cape to cape, this whole main we see, is
young and froward. And far southward, past this Kanneeda and Vivenza,
are haughty, overbearing streams, which at their mouths dam back the
ocean, and long refuse to mix their freshness with the foreign
brine:—so bold, so strong, so bent on hurling off aggression is this
brave main, Kolumbo;—last sought, last found, Mardi’s estate, so long
kept back;—pray Oro, it be not squandered foolishly. Here lie
plantations, held in fee by stout hearts and arms; and boundless
fields, that may be had for seeing. Here, your foes are forests, struck
down with bloodless maces.—Ho! Mardi’s Poor, and Mardi’s Strong! ye,
who starve or beg; seventh-sons who slave for earth’s first-born—here
is your home; predestinated yours; Come over, Empire-founders! fathers
of the wedded tribes to come!—abject now, illustrious evermore:—Ho:
Sinew, Brawn, and Thigh!”

“A very fine invocation,” said Media, “now Babbalanja, be seated; and
tell us whether Dominora and the kings of Porpheero do not own some
small portion of this great continent, which just now you poetically
pronounced as the spoil of any vagabonds who may choose to settle
therein? Is not Kanneeda, Dominora’s?”

“And was not Vivenza once Dominora’s also? And what Vivenza now is,
Kanneeda soon must be. I speak not, my lord, as wishful of what I say,
but simply as foreknowing it. The thing must come. Vain for Dominora to
claim allegiance from all the progeny she spawns. As well might the old
patriarch of the flood reappear, and claim the right of rule over all
mankind, as descended from the loins of his three roving sons.

“’Tis the old law:—the East peoples the West, the West the East; flux
and reflux. And time may come, after the rise and fall of nations yet
unborn, that, risen from its future ashes, Porpheero shall be the
promised land, and from her surplus hordes Kolumbo people it.”

Still coasting on, next day, we came to Vivenza; and as Media desired
to land first at a point midway between its extremities, in order to
behold the convocation of chiefs supposed to be assembled at this
season, we held on our way, till we gained a lofty ridge, jutting out
into the lagoon, a bastion to the neighboring land. It terminated in a
lofty natural arch of solid trap. Billows beat against its base. But
above, waved an inviting copse, wherein was revealed an open temple of
canes, containing one only image, that of a helmeted female, the
tutelar deity of Vivenza.

The canoes drew near.

“Lo! what inscription is that?” cried Media, “there, chiseled over the
arch?”

Studying those immense hieroglyphics awhile, antiquarian Mohi still
eyeing them, said slowly:—“In-this-re-publi-can-land-all-men-are-
born-free-and-equal.”

“False!” said Media.

“And how long stay they so?” said Babbalanja.

“But look lower, old man,” cried Media, “methinks there’s a small
hieroglyphic or two hidden away in yonder angle.—Interpret them, old
man.”

After much screwing of his eyes, for those characters were very minute,
Champollion Mohi thus spoke—” Except-the-tribe-of-Hamo.”

“That nullifies the other,” cried Media. “Ah, ye republicans!”

“It seems to have been added for a postscript,” rejoined Braid-Beard,
screwing his eyes again.

“Perhaps so,” said Babbalanja, “but some wag must have done it.”

Shooting through the arch, we rapidly gained the beach.




CHAPTER LIV.
They Visit The Great Central Temple Of Vivenza


The throng that greeted us upon landing were exceedingly boisterous.

“Whence came ye?” they cried. “Whither bound? Saw ye ever such a land
as this? Is it not a great and extensive republic? Pray, observe how
tall we are; just feel of our thighs; Are we not a glorious people?
Here, feel of our beards. Look round; look round; be not afraid; Behold
those palms; swear now, that this land surpasses all others. Old
Bello’s mountains are mole-hills to ours; his rivers, rills; his
empires, villages; his palm-trees, shrubs.”

“True,” said Babbalanja. “But great Oro must have had some hand in
making your mountains and streams.—Would ye have been as great in a
desert?”

“Where is your king?” asked Media, drawing himself up in his robe, and
cocking his crown.

“Ha, ha, my fine fellow! We are all kings here; royalty breathes in the
common air. But come on, come on. Let us show you our great Temple of
Freedom.”

And so saying, irreverently grasping his sacred arm, they conducted us
toward a lofty structure, planted upon a bold hill, and supported by
thirty pillars of palm; four quite green; as if recently added; and
beyond these, an almost interminable vacancy, as if all the palms in
Mardi, were at some future time, to aid in upholding that fabric.

Upon the summit of the temple was a staff; and as we drew nigh, a man
with a collar round his neck, and the red marks of stripes upon his
back, was just in the act of hoisting a tappa standard— correspondingly
striped. Other collared menials were going in and out of the temple.

Near the porch, stood an image like that on the top of the arch we had
seen. Upon its pedestal, were pasted certain hieroglyphical notices;
according to Mohi, offering rewards for missing men, so many hands
high.

Entering the temple, we beheld an amphitheatrical space, in the middle
of which, a great fire was burning. Around it, were many chiefs, robed
in long togas, and presenting strange contrasts in their style of
tattooing.

Some were sociably laughing, and chatting; others diligently making
excavations between their teeth with slivers of bamboo; or turning
their heads into mills, were grinding up leaves and ejecting their
juices. Some were busily inserting the down of a thistle into their
ears. Several stood erect, intent upon maintaining striking attitudes;
their javelins tragically crossed upon their chests. They would have
looked very imposing, were it not, that in rear their vesture was sadly
disordered. Others, with swelling fronts, seemed chiefly indebted to
their dinners for their dignity. Many were nodding and napping. And,
here and there, were sundry indefatigable worthies, making a great show
of imperious and indispensable business; sedulously folding banana
leaves into scrolls, and recklessly placing them into the hands of
little boys, in gay turbans and trim little girdles, who thereupon fled
as if with salvation for the dying.

It was a crowded scene; the dusky chiefs, here and there, grouped
together, and their fantastic tattooings showing like the carved work
on quaint old chimney-stacks, seen from afar. But one of their number
overtopped all the rest. As when, drawing nigh unto old Rome, amid the
crowd of sculptured columns and gables, St. Peter’s grand dome soars
far aloft, serene in the upper air; so, showed one calm grand forehead
among those of this mob of chieftains. That head was Saturnina’s. Gall
and Spurzheim! saw you ever such a brow?—poised like an avalanche,
under the shadow of a forest! woe betide the devoted valleys below!
Lavatar! behold those lips,—like mystic scrolls! Those eyes,— like
panthers’ caves at the base of Popocatepetl!

“By my right hand, Saturnina,” cried Babbalanja, “but thou wert made in
the image of thy Maker! Yet, have I beheld men, to the eye as
commanding as thou; and surmounted by heads globe-like as thine, who
never had thy caliber. We must measure brains, not heads, my lord;
else, the sperm whale, with his tun of an occiput, would transcend us
all.”

Near by, were arched ways, leading to subterranean places, whence
issued a savory steam, and an extraordinary clattering of calabashes,
and smacking of lips, as if something were being eaten down there by
the fattest of fat fellows, with the heartiest of appetites, and the
most irresistible of relishes. It was a quaffing, guzzling, gobbling
noise. Peeping down, we beheld a company, breasted up against a board,
groaning under numerous viands. In the middle of all, was a mighty
great gourd, yellow as gold, and jolly round like a pumpkin in October,
and so big it must have grown in the sun. Thence flowed a tide of red
wine. And before it, stood plenty of paunches being filled therewith
like portly stone jars at a fountain. Melancholy to tell, before that
fine flood of old wine, and among those portly old topers, was a lean
man; who occasionally ducked in his bill. He looked like an ibis
standing in the Nile at flood tide, among a tongue-lapping herd of
hippopotami.

They were jolly as the jolliest; and laughed so uproariously, that
their hemispheres all quivered and shook, like vast provinces in an
earthquake. Ha! ha! ha! how they laughed, and they roared. A deaf man
might have heard them; and no milk could have soured within a
forty-two-pounder ball shot of that place.

Now, the smell of good things is no very bad thing in itself. It is the
savor of good things beyond; proof positive of a glorious good meal. So
snuffing up those zephyrs from Araby the blest, those boisterous gales,
blowing from out the mouths of baked boars, stuffed with bread-fruit,
bananas, and sage, we would fain have gone down and partaken.

But this could not be; for we were told that those worthies below, were
a club in secret conclave; very busy in settling certain weighty state
affairs upon a solid basis, They were all chiefs of immense
capacity:—how many gallons, there was no finding out.

Be sure, now, a most riotous noise came up from those catacombs, which
seemed full of the ghosts of fat Lamberts; and this uproar it was, that
heightened the din above-ground.

But heedless of all, in the midst of the amphitheater, stood a tall,
gaunt warrior, ferociously tattooed, with a beak like a buzzard; long
dusty locks; and his hands full of headless arrows. He was laboring
under violent paroxysms; three benevolent individuals essaying to hold
him. But repeatedly breaking loose, he burst anew into his delirium;
while with an absence of sympathy, distressing to behold, the rest of
the assembly seemed wholly engrossed with themselves; nor did they
appear to care how soon the unfortunate lunatic might demolish himself
by his frantic proceedings.

Toward one side of the amphitheatrical space, perched high upon an
elevated dais, sat a white-headed old man with a tomahawk in his hand:
earnestly engaged in overseeing the tumult; though not a word did he
say. Occasionally, however, he was regarded by those present with a
mysterious sort of deference; and when they chanced to pass between him
and the crazy man, they invariably did so in a stooping position;
probably to elude the atmospheric grape and cannister, continually
flying from the mouth of the lunatic.

“What mob is this?” cried Media.

“’Tis the grand council of Vivenza,” cried a bystander. “Hear ye not
Alanno?” and he pointed to the lunatic.

Now coming close to Alanno, we found, that with incredible volubility,
he was addressing the assembly upon some all-absorbing subject
connected with King Bello, and his presumed encroachments toward the
northwest of Vivenza.

One hand smiting his hip, and the other his head, the lunatic thus
proceeded; roaring like a wild beast, and beating the air like a
windmill:—

“I have said it! the thunder is flashing, the lightning is crashing!
already there’s an earthquake in Dominora! Full soon will old Bello
discover that his diabolical machinations against this ineffable land
must soon come to naught. Who dare not declare, that we are not
invincible? I repeat it, we are. Ha! ha! Audacious Bello must bite the
dust! Hair by hair, we will trail his gory gray beard at the end of our
spears! Ha, ha! I grow hoarse; but would mine were a voice like the
wild bulls of Bullorom, that I might be heard from one end of this
great and gorgeous land to its farthest zenith; ay, to the uttermost
diameter of its circumference. Awake! oh Vivenza. The signs of the
times are portentous; nay, extraordinary; I hesitate not to add,
peculiar! Up! up! Let us not descend to the bathos, when we should soar
to the climax! Does not all Mardi wink and look on? Is the great sun
itself a frigid spectator? Then let us double up our mandibles to the
deadly encounter. Methinks I see it now. Old Bello is crafty, and his
oath is recorded to obliterate us! Across this wide lagoon he casts his
serpent eyes; whets his insatiate bill; mumbles his barbarous tusks;
licks his forked tongues; and who knows when we shall have the shark in
our midst? Yet be not deceived; for though as yet, Bello has forborn
molesting us openly, his emissaries are at work; his infernal sappers,
and miners, and wet-nurses, and midwives, and grave- diggers are busy!
His canoe-yards are all in commotion! In navies his forests are being
launched upon the wave; and ere long typhoons, zephyrs, white-squalls,
balmy breezes, hurricanes, and besoms will be raging round us!”

His philippic concluded, Alanno was conducted from the place; and being
now quite exhausted, cold cobble-stones were applied to his temples,
and he was treated to a bath in a stream.

This chieftain, it seems, was from a distant western valley, called
Hio-Hio, one of the largest and most fertile in Vivenza, though but
recently settled. Its inhabitants, and those of the vales adjoining,— a
right sturdy set of fellows,—were accounted the most dogmatically
democratic and ultra of all the tribes in Vivenza; ever seeking to push
on their brethren to the uttermost; and especially were they bitter
against Bello. But they were a fine young tribe, nevertheless. Like
strong new wine they worked violently in becoming clear. Time, perhaps,
would make them all right.

An interval of greater uproar than ever now ensued; during which, with
his tomahawk, the white-headed old man repeatedly thumped and pounded
the seat where he sat, apparently to augment the din, though he looked
anxious to suppress it.

At last, tiring of his posture, he whispered in the ear of a chief, his
friend; who, approaching a portly warrior present, prevailed upon him
to rise and address the assembly. And no sooner did this one do so,
than the whole convocation dispersed, as if to their yams; and with a
grin, the little old man leaped from his seat, and stretched his legs
on a mat.

The fire was now extinguished, and the temple deserted.




CHAPTER LV.
Wherein Babbalanja Comments Upon The Speech Of Alanno


As we lingered in the precincts of the temple after all others had
departed, sundry comments were made upon what we had seen; and having
remarked the hostility of the lunatic orator toward Dominora,
Babbalanja thus addressed Media:—

“My lord, I am constrained to believe, that all Vivenza can not be of
the same mind with the grandiloquent chief from Hio-Hio. Nevertheless,
I imagine, that between Dominora and this land, there exists at bottom
a feeling akin to animosity, which is not yet wholly extinguished;
though but the smoldering embers of a once raging fire. My lord, you
may call it poetry if you will, but there are nations in Mardi, that to
others stand in the relation of sons to sires. Thus with Dominora and
Vivenza. And though, its majority attained, Vivenza is now its own
master, yet should it not fail in a reverential respect for its parent.
In man or nation, old age is honorable; and a boy, however tall, should
never take his sire by the beard. And though Dominora did indeed ill
merit Vivenza’s esteem, yet by abstaining from criminations, Vivenza
should ever merit its own. And if in time to come, which Oro forbid,
Vivenza must needs go to battle with King Bello, let Vivenza first
cross the old veteran’s spear with all possible courtesy. On the other
hand, my lord, King Bello should never forget, that whatever be
glorious in Vivenza, redounds to himself. And as some gallant old lord
proudly measures the brawn and stature of his son; and joys to view in
his noble young lineaments the likeness of his own; bethinking him,
that when at last laid in his tomb, he will yet survive in the long,
strong life of his child, the worthy inheritor of his valor and renown;
even so, should King Bello regard the generous promise of this young
Vivenza of his own lusty begetting. My lord, behold these two states!
Of all nations in the Archipelago, they alone are one in blood.
Dominora is the last and greatest Anak of Old Times; Vivenza, the
foremost and goodliest stripling of the Present. One is full of the
past; the other brims with the future. Ah! did this sire’s old heart
but beat to free thoughts, and back his bold son, all Mardi would go
down before them. And high Oro may have ordained for them a career,
little divined by the mass. Methinks, that as Vivenza will never cause
old Bello to weep for his son; so, Vivenza will not, this many a long
year, be called to weep over the grave of its sire. And though King
Bello may yet lay aside his old-fashioned cocked hat of a crown, and
comply with the plain costume of the times; yet will his, frame remain
sturdy as of yore, and equally grace any habiliments he may don. And
those who say, Dominora is old and worn out, may very possibly err. For
if, as a nation, Dominora be old—her present generation is full as
young as the youths in any land under the sun. Then, Ho! worthy twain!
Each worthy the other, join hands on the instant, and weld them
together. Lo! the past is a prophet. Be the future, its prophecy
fulfilled.”




CHAPTER LVI.
A Scene In The Land Of Warwicks, Or King-Makers


Wending our way from the temple, we were accompanied by a fluent,
obstreperous wight, one Znobbi, a runaway native of Porpheero, but now
an enthusiastic inhabitant of Vivenza.

“Here comes our great chief!” he cried. “Behold him! It was _I_ that
had a hand in making him what he is!”

And so saying, he pointed out a personage, no way distinguished, except
by the tattooing on his forehead—stars, thirty in number; and an
uncommonly long spear in his hand. Freely he mingled with the crowd.

“Behold, how familiar I am with him!” cried Znobbi, approaching, and
pitcher-wise taking him by the handle of his face.

“Friend,” said the dignitary, “thy salute is peculiar, but welcome. I
reverence the enlightened people of this land.”

“Mean-spirited hound!” muttered Media, “were I him, I had impaled that
audacious plebeian.”

“There’s a Head-Chief for you, now, my fine fellow!” cried Znobbi.
“Hurrah! Three cheers! Ay, ay! All kings here—all equal. Every thing’s
in common.”

Here, a bystander, feeling something grazing his side, looked down; and
perceived Znobbi’s hand in clandestine vicinity to the pouch at his
girdle-end.

Whereupon the crowd shouted, “A thief! a thief!” And with a loud voice
the starred chief cried—“Seize him, people, and tie him to yonder
tree.”

And they seized, and tied him on the spot.

“Ah,” said Media, “this chief has something to say, after all; he
pinions a king at a word, though a plebeian takes him by the nose.
Beshrew me, I doubt not, that spear of his, though without a tassel, is
longer and sharper than mine.”

“There’s not so much freedom here as these freemen think,” said
Babbalanja, turning; “I laugh and admire.”




CHAPTER LVII.
They Hearken Unto A Voice From The Gods


Next day we retraced our voyage northward, to visit that section of
Vivenza.

In due time we landed.

To look round was refreshing. Of all the lands we had seen, none looked
more promising. The groves stood tall and green; the fields spread
flush and broad; the dew of the first morning seemed hardly vanished
from the grass. On all sides was heard the fall of waters, the swarming
of bees, and the rejoicing hum of a thriving population.

“Ha, ha!” laughed Yoomy, “Labor laughs in this land; and claps his
hands in the jubilee groves! methinks that Yillah will yet be found.”

Generously entertained, we tarried in this land; till at length, from
over the Lagoon, came full tidings of the eruption we had witnessed in
Franko, with many details. The conflagration had spread through
Porpheero and the kings were to and fro hunted, like malefactors by
blood-hounds; all that part of Mardi was heaving with throes.

With the utmost delight, these tidings were welcomed by many; yet
others heard them with boding concern.

Those, too, there were, who rejoiced that the kings were cast down; but
mourned that the people themselves stood not firmer. A victory, turned
to no wise and enduring account, said they, is no victory at all. Some
victories revert to the vanquished.

But day by day great crowds ran down to the beach, in wait for canoes
periodically bringing further intelligence.

Every hour new cries startled the air. “Hurrah! another, kingdom is
burnt down to the earth’s edge; another demigod is unhelmed; another
republic is dawning. Shake hands, freemen, shake hands! Soon will we
hear of Dominora down in the dust; of hapless Verdanna free as
ourselves; all Porpheero’s volcanoes are bursting! Who may withstand
the people? The times tell terrible tales to tyrants! Ere we die,
freemen, all Mardi will be free.”

Overhearing these shouts, Babbalanja thus addressed Media:—“My lord, I
can not but believe, that these men, are far more excited than those
with whom they so ardently sympathize. But no wonder. The single
discharges which are heard in Porpheero; here come condensed in one
tremendous report. Every arrival is a firing off of events by
platoons.”

Now, during this tumultuous interval, King Media very prudently kept
himself exceedingly quiet. He doffed his regalia; and in all things
carried himself with a dignified discretion. And many hours he absented
himself; none knowing whither he went, or what his employment.

So also with Babbalanja. But still pursuing our search, at last we all
journeyed into a great valley, whose inhabitants were more than
commonly inflated with the ardor of the times.

Rambling on, we espied a clamorous crowd gathered about a conspicuous
palm, against which, a scroll was fixed.

The people were violently agitated; storming out maledictions against
the insolent knave, who, over night must have fixed there, that
scandalous document. But whoever he may have been, certain it was, he
had contrived to hood himself effectually.

After much vehement discussion, during which sundry inflammatory
harangues were made from the stumps of trees near by, it was proposed,
that the scroll should be read aloud, so that all might give ear.

Seizing it, a fiery youth mounted upon the bowed shoulders of an old
man, his sire; and with a shrill voice, ever and anon interrupted by
outcries, read as follows:—

“Sovereign-kings of Vivenza! it is fit you should hearken to wisdom.
But well aware, that you give ear to little wisdom except of your own;
and that as freemen, you are free to hunt down him who dissents from
your majesties; I deem it proper to address you anonymously.

“And if it please you, you may ascribe this voice to the gods: for
never will you trace it to man.

“It is not unknown, sovereign-kings! that in these boisterous days, the
lessons of history are almost discarded, as superseded by present
experiences. And that while all Mardi’s Present has grown out of its
Past, it is becoming obsolete to refer to what has been. Yet,
peradventure, the Past is an apostle.

“The grand error of this age, sovereign-kings! is the general
supposition, that the very special Diabolus is abroad; whereas, the
very special Diabolus has been abroad ever since Mardi began.

“And the grand error of your nation, sovereign-kings! seems this:—The
conceit that Mardi is now in the last scene of the last act of her
drama; and that all preceding events were ordained, to bring about the
catastrophe you believe to be at hand,—a universal and permanent
Republic.

“May it please you, those who hold to these things are fools, and not
wise.

“Time is made up of various ages; and each thinks its own a novelty.
But imbedded in the walls of the pyramids, which outrun all
chronologies, sculptured stones are found, belonging to yet older
fabrics. And as in the mound-building period of yore, so every age
thinks its erections will forever endure. But as your forests grow
apace, sovereign-kings! overrunning the tumuli in your western vales;
so, while deriving their substance from the past, succeeding
generations overgrow it; but in time, themselves decay.

“Oro decrees these vicissitudes.

“In chronicles of old, you read, sovereign kings! that an eagle from
the clouds presaged royalty to the fugitive Taquinoo; and a king,
Taquinoo reigned; No end to my dynasty, thought he.

“But another omen descended, foreshadowing the fall of Zooperbi, his
son; and Zooperbi returning from his camp, found his country a fortress
against him. No more kings would she have. And for five hundred
twelve-moons the Regifugium or King’s-flight, was annually celebrated
like your own jubilee day. And rampant young orators stormed out
detestation of kings; and augurs swore that their birds presaged
immortality to freedom.

“Then, Romara’s free eagles flew over all Mardi, and perched on the
topmost diadems of the east.

“Ever thus must it be.

“For, mostly, monarchs are as gemmed bridles upon the world, checking
the plungings of a steed from the Pampas. And republics are as vast
reservoirs, draining down all streams to one level; and so, breeding a
fullness which can not remain full, without overflowing. And thus,
Romara flooded all Mardi, till scarce an Ararat was left of the lofty
kingdoms which had been.

“Thus, also, did Franko, fifty twelve-moons ago. Thus may she do again.
And though not yet, have you, sovereign-kings! in any large degree done
likewise, it is because you overflow your redundancies within your own
mighty borders; having a wild western waste, which many shepherds with
their flocks could not overrun in a day. Yet overrun at last it will
be; and then, the recoil must come.

“And, may it please you, that thus far your chronicles had narrated a
very different story, had your population been pressed and packed, like
that of your old sire-land Dominora. Then, your great experiment might
have proved an explosion; like the chemist’s who, stirring his mixture,
was blown by it into the air.

“For though crossed, and recrossed by many brave quarterings, and
boasting the great Bull in your pedigree; yet, sovereign-kings! you are
not meditative philosophers like the people of a small republic of old;
nor enduring stoics, like their neighbors. Pent up, like them, may it
please you, your thirteen original tribes had proved more turbulent,
than so many mutinous legions. Free horses need wide prairies; and
fortunate for you, sovereign-kings! that you have room enough, wherein
to be free.

“And, may it please you, you are free, partly, because you are young.
Your nation is like a fine, florid youth, full of fiery impulses, and
hard to restrain; his strong hand nobly championing his heart. On all
sides, freely he gives, and still seeks to acquire. The breath of his
nostrils is like smoke in spring air; every tendon is electric with
generous resolves. The oppressor he defies to his beard; the high walls
of old opinions he scales with a bound. In the future he sees all the
domes of the East.

“But years elapse, and this bold boy is transformed. His eyes open not
as of yore; his heart is shut up as a vice. He yields not a groat; and
seeking no more acquisitions, is only bent on preserving his hoard. The
maxims once trampled under foot, are now printed on his front; and he
who hated oppressors, is become an oppressor himself.

“Thus, often, with men; thus, often, with nations. Then marvel not,
sovereign-kings! that old states are different from yours; and think
not, your own must forever remain liberal as now.

“Each age thinks its own is eternal. But though for five hundred
twelve-moons, all Romara, by courtesy of history, was republican; yet,
at last, her terrible king-tigers came, and spotted themselves with
gore.

“And time was, when Dominora was republican, down to her sturdy back-
bone. The son of an absolute monarch became the man Karolus; and his
crown and head, both rolled in the dust. And Dominora had her patriots
by thousands; and lusty Defenses, and glorious Areopagiticas were
written, not since surpassed; and no turban was doffed save in homage
of Oro.

“Yet, may it please you, to the sound of pipe and tabor, the second
King Karolus returned in good time; and was hailed gracious majesty by
high and low.

“Throughout all eternity, the parts of the past are but parts of the
future reversed. In the old foot-prints, up and down, you mortals go,
eternally traveling your Sierras. And not more infallible the
ponderings of the Calculating Machine than the deductions from the
decimals of history.

“In nations, sovereign-kings! there is a transmigration of souls; in
you, is a marvelous destiny. The eagle of Romara revives in your own
mountain bird, and once more is plumed for her flight. Her screams are
answered by the vauntful cries of a hawk; his red comb yet reeking with
slaughter. And one East, one West, those bold birds may fly, till they
lock pinions in the midmost beyond.

“But, soaring in the sky over the nations that shall gather their
broods under their wings, that bloody hawk may hereafter be taken for
the eagle.

“And though crimson republics may rise in constellations, like fiery
Aldebarans, speeding to their culminations; yet, down must they sink at
last, and leave the old sultan-sun in the sky; in time, again to be
deposed.

“For little longer, may it please you, can republics subsist now, than
in days gone by. For, assuming that Mardi is wiser than of old;
nevertheless, though all men approached sages in intelligence, some
would yet be more wise than others; and so, the old degrees be
preserved. And no exemption would an equality of knowledge furnish,
from the inbred servility of mortal to mortal; from all the organic
causes, which inevitably divide mankind into brigades and battalions,
with captains at their head.

“Civilization has not ever been the brother of equality. Freedom was
born among the wild eyries in the mountains; and barbarous tribes have
sheltered under her wings, when the enlightened people of the plain
have nestled under different pinions.

“Though, thus far, for you, sovereign-kings! your republic has been
fruitful of blessings; yet, in themselves, monarchies are not utterly
evil. For many nations, they are better than republics; for many, they
will ever so remain. And better, on all hands, that peace should rule
with a scepter, than than the tribunes of the people should brandish
their broadswords. Better be the subject of a king, upright and just;
than a freeman in Franko, with the executioner’s ax at every corner.

“It is not the prime end, and chief blessing, to be politically free.
And freedom is only good as a means; is no end in itself Nor, did man
fight it out against his masters to the haft, not then, would he
uncollar his neck from the yoke. A born thrall to the last, yelping out
his liberty, he still remains a slave unto Oro; and well is it for the
universe, that Oro’s scepter is absolute.

“World-old the saying, that it is easier to govern others, than
oneself. And that all men should govern themselves as nations, needs
that all men be better, and wiser, than the wisest of one-man rulers.
But in no stable democracy do all men govern themselves. Though an army
be all volunteers, martial law must prevail. Delegate your power, you
leagued mortals must. The hazard you must stand. And though unlike King
Bello of Dominora, your great chieftain, sovereign-kings! may not
declare war of himself; nevertheless, has he done a still more imperial
thing:—gone to war without declaring intentions. You yourselves were
precipitated upon a neighboring nation, ere you knew your spears were
in your hands.

“But, as in stars you have written it on the welkin, sovereign-kings!
you are a great and glorious people. And verily, yours is the best and
happiest land under the sun. But not wholly, because you, in your
wisdom, decreed it: your origin and geography necessitated it. Nor, in
their germ, are all your blessings to be ascribed to the noble sires,
who of yore fought in your behalf, sovereign-kings! Your nation enjoyed
no little independence before your Declaration declared it. Your
ancient pilgrims fathered your liberty; and your wild woods harbored
the nursling. For the state that to-day is made up of slaves, can not
to-morrow transmute her bond into free; though lawlessness may
transform them into brutes. Freedom is the name for a thing that is
_not_ freedom; this, a lesson never learned in an hour or an age. By
some tribes it will never be learned.

“Yet, if it please you, there may be such a thing as being free under
Caesar. Ages ago, there were as many vital freemen, as breathe vital
air to-day.

“Names make not distinctions; some despots rule without swaying
scepters. Though King Bello’s palace was not put together by yoked men;
your federal temple of freedom, sovereign-kings! was the handiwork of
slaves.

“It is not gildings, and gold maces, and crown jewels alone, that make
a people servile. There is much bowing and cringing among you
yourselves, sovereign-kings! Poverty is abased before riches, all Mardi
over; any where, it is hard to be a debtor; any where, the wise will
lord it over fools; every where, suffering is found.

“Thus, freedom is more social than political. And its real felicity is
not to be shared. _That_ is of a man’s own individual getting and
holding. It is not, who rules the state, but who rules me. Better be
secure under one king, than exposed to violence from twenty millions of
monarchs, though oneself be of the number.

“But superstitious notions you harbor, sovereign kings! Did you visit
Dominora, you would not be marched straight into a dungeon. And though
you would behold sundry sights displeasing, you would start to inhale
such liberal breezes; and hear crowds boasting of their privileges; as
you, of yours. Nor has the wine of Dominora, a monarchical flavor.

“Now, though far and wide, to keep equal pace with the times, great
reforms, of a verity, be needed; nowhere are bloody revolutions
required. Though it be the most certain of remedies, no prudent invalid
opens his veins, to let out his disease with his life. And though all
evils may be assuaged; all evils can not be done away. For evil is the
chronic malady of the universe; and checked in one place, breaks forth
in another.

“Of late, on this head, some wild dreams have departed.

“There are many, who erewhile believed that the age of pikes and
javelins was passed; that after a heady and blustering youth, old Mardi
was at last settling down into a serene old age; and that the Indian
summer, first discovered in your land, sovereign kings! was the hazy
vapor emitted from its tranquil pipe. But it has not so proved. Mardi’s
peaces are but truces. Long absent, at last the red comets have
returned. And return they must, though their periods be ages. And
should Mardi endure till mountain melt into mountain, and all the isles
form one table-land; yet, would it but expand the old battle-plain.

“Students of history are horror-struck at the massacres of old; but in
the shambles, men are being murdered to-day. Could time be reversed,
and the future change places with the past, the past would cry out
against us, and our future, full as loudly, as we against the ages
foregone. All the Ages are his children, calling each other names.

“Hark ye, sovereign-kings! cheer not on the yelping pack too furiously:
Hunters have been torn by their hounds. Be advised; wash your hands.
Hold aloof. Oro has poured out an ocean for an everlasting barrier
between you and the worst folly which other republics have perpetrated.
That barrier hold sacred. And swear never to cross over to Porpheero,
by manifesto or army, unless you traverse dry land.

“And be not too grasping, nearer home. It is not freedom to filch.
Expand not your area too widely, now. Seek you proselytes? Neighboring
nations may be free, without coming under your banner. And if you can
not lay your ambition, know this: that it is best served, by waiting
events.

“Time, but Time only, may enable you to cross the equator; and give you
the Arctic Circles for your boundaries.”

So read the anonymous scroll; which straightway, was torn into shreds.

“Old tory, and monarchist!” they shouted, “Preaching over his benighted
sermons in these enlightened times! Fool! does he not know that all the
Past and its graves are being dug over?”

They were furious; so wildly rolling their eyes after victims, that
well was it for King Media, he wore not his crown; and in silence, we
moved unnoted from out the crowd.

“My lord, I am amazed at the indiscretion of a demigod,” said
Babbalanja, as we passed on our way; “I recognized your sultanic style
the very first sentence. This, then, is the result of your hours of
seclusion.”

“Philosopher! I am astounded at your effrontery. I detected your
philosophy the very first maxim. Who posted that parchment for you?”

So, each charged the other with its authorship: and there was no
finding out, whether, indeed, either knew aught of its origin.

Now, could it have been Babbalanja? Hardly. For, philosophic as the
document was, it seemed too dogmatic and conservative for him. King
Media? But though imperially absolute in his political sentiments,
Media delivered not himself so boldly, when actually beholding the
eruption in Franko.

Indeed, the settlement of this question must be left to the
commentators on Mardi, some four or five hundred centuries hence.




CHAPTER LVIII.
They Visit The Extreme South Of Vivenza


We penetrated further and further into the valleys around; but, though,
as elsewhere, at times we heard whisperings that promised an end to our
wanderings;—we still wandered on; and once again, even Yoomy abated his
sanguine hopes.

And now, we prepared to embark for the extreme south of the land.

But we were warned by the people, that in that portion of Vivenza,
whither we were going, much would be seen repulsive to strangers. Such
things, however, indulgent visitors overlooked. For themselves, they
were well aware of those evils. Northern Vivenza had done all it could
to assuage them; but in vain; the inhabitants of those southern valleys
were a fiery, and intractable race; heeding neither expostulations, nor
entreaties. They were wedded to their ways. Nay, they swore, that if
the northern tribes persisted in intermeddlings, they would dissolve
the common alliance, and establish a distinct confederacy among
themselves.

Our coasting voyage at an end, our keels grated the beach among many
prostrate palms, decaying, and washed by the billows. Though part and
parcel of the shore we had left, this region seemed another land. Fewer
thriving thingswere seen; fewer cheerful sounds were heard.

“Here labor has lost his laugh!” cried Yoomy.

It was a great plain where we landed; and there, under a burning sun,
hundreds of collared men were toiling in trenches, filled with the taro
plant; a root most flourishing in that soil. Standing grimly over
these, were men unlike them; armed with long thongs, which descended
upon the toilers, and made wounds. Blood and sweat mixed; and in great
drops, fell.

“Who eat these plants thus nourished?” cried Yoomy. “Are these men?”
asked Babbalanja.

“Which mean you?” said Mohi.

Heeding him not, Babbalanja advanced toward the fore-most of those with
the thongs,—one Nulli: a cadaverous, ghost-like man; with a low ridge
of forehead; hair, steel-gray; and wondrous eyes;—bright, nimble, as
the twin Corposant balls, playing about the ends of ships’ royal-yards
in gales.

The sun passed under a cloud; and Nulli, darting at Babbalanja those
wondrous eyes, there fell upon him a baleful glare.

“Have they souls?” he asked, pointing to the serfs.

“No,” said Nulli, “their ancestors may have had; but their souls have
been bred out of their descendants; as the instinct of scent is killed
in pointers.”

Approaching one of the serfs, Media took him by the hand, and felt of
it long; and looked into his eyes; and placed his ear to his side; and
exclaimed, “Surely this being has flesh that is warm; he has Oro in his
eye; and a heart in him that beats. I swear he is a man.”

“Is this our lord the king?” cried Mohi, starting.

“What art thou,” said Babbalanja to the serf. “Dost ever feel in thee a
sense of right and wrong? Art ever glad or sad?—They tell us thou art
not a man:—speak, then, for thyself; say, whether thou beliest thy
Maker.”

“Speak not of my Maker to me. Under the lash, I believe my masters, and
account myself a brute; but in my dreams, bethink myself an angel. But
I am bond; and my little ones;—their mother’s milk is gall.”

“Just Oro!” cried Yoomy, “do no thunders roll,—no lightnings flash in
this accursed land!”

“Asylum for all Mardi’s thralls!” cried Media.

“Incendiaries!” cried he with the wondrous eyes, “come ye, firebrands,
to light the flame of revolt? Know ye not, that here are many serfs,
who, incited to obtain their liberty, might wreak some dreadful
vengeance? Avaunt, thou king! _thou_ horrified at this? Go back to Odo,
and right her wrongs! These serfs are happier than thine; though thine,
no collars wear; more happy as they are, than if free. Are they not
fed, clothed, and cared for? Thy serfs pine for food: never yet did
these; who have no thoughts, no cares.”

“Thoughts and cares are life, and liberty, and immortality!” cried
Babbalanja; “and are their souls, then, blown out as candles?”

“Ranter! they are content,” cried Nulli. “They shed no tears.”

“Frost never weeps,” said Babbalanja; “and tears are frozen in those
frigid eyes.”

“Oh fettered sons of fettered mothers, conceived and born in manacles,”
cried Yoomy; “dragging them through life; and falling with them,
clanking in the grave:—oh, beings as ourselves, how my stiff arm
shivers to avenge you! ’Twere absolution for the matricide, to strike
one rivet from your chains. My heart outswells its home!”

“Oro! Art thou?” cried Babbalanja; “and doth this thing exist? It
shakes my little faith.” Then, turning upon Nulli, “How can ye abide to
sway this curs’d dominion?”

“Peace, fanatic! Who else may till unwholesome fields, but these? And
as these beings are, so shall they remain; ’tis right and righteous!
Maramma champions it!—I swear it! The first blow struck for them,
dissolves the union of Vivenza’s vales. The northern tribes well know
it; and know me.”

Said Media, “Yet if—”

“No more! another word, and, king as thou art, thou shalt be
dungeoned:—here, there is such a law; thou art not among the northern
tribes.”

“And this is freedom!” murmured Media; “when heaven’s own voice is
throttled. And were these serfs to rise, and fight for it; like dogs,
they would be hunted down by her pretended sons!”

“Pray, heaven!” cried Yoomy, “they may yet find a way to loose their
bonds without one drop of blood. But hear me, Oro! were there no other
way, and should their masters not relent, all honest hearts must cheer
this tribe of Hamo on; though they cut their chains with blades thrice
edged, and gory to the haft! ’Tis right to fight for freedom, whoever
be the thrall.”

“These South savannahs may yet prove battle-fields,” said Mohi;
gloomily, as we retraced our steps.

“Be it,” said Yoomy. “Oro will van the right.”

“Not always has it proved so,” said Babbalanja. “Oft-times, the right
fights single-handed against the world; and Oro champions none. In all
things, man’s own battles, man himself must fight. Yoomy: so far as
feeling goes, your sympathies are not more hot than mine; but for these
serfs you would cross spears; yet, I would not. Better present woes for
some, than future woes for all.”

“No need to fight,” cried Yoomy, “to liberate that tribe of Hamo
instantly; a way may be found, and no irretrievable evil ensue.”

“Point it out, and be blessed, Yoomy.”

“That is for Vivenza; but the head is dull, where the heart is cold.”

“My lord,” said Babbalanja, “you have startled us by your kingly
sympathy for suffering; say thou, then, in what wise manner it shall be
relieved.”

“That is for Vivenza,” said Media.

“Mohi, you are old: speak thou.”

“Let Vivenza speak,” said Mohi.

“Thus then we all agree; and weeping all but echo hard-hearted Nulli.
Tears are not swords and wrongs seem almost natural as rights. For the
righteous to suppress an evil, is sometimes harder than for others to
uphold it. Humanity cries out against this vast enormity:— not one man
knows a prudent remedy. Blame not, then, the North; and wisely judge
the South. Ere, as a nation, they became responsible, this thing was
planted in their midst. Such roots strike deep. Place to-day those
serfs in Dominora; and with them, all Vivenza’s Past;— and serfs, for
many years, in Dominora, they would be. Easy is it to stand afar and
rail. All men are censors who have lungs. We can say, the stars are
wrongly marshaled. Blind men say the sun is blind. A thousand muscles
wag our tongues; though our tongues were housed, that they might have a
home. Whose is free from crime, let him cross himself—but hold his
cross upon his lips. That he is not bad, is not of him. Potters’ clay
and wax are all, molded by hands invisible. The soil decides the man.
And, ere birth, man wills not to be born here or there. These southern
tribes have grown up with this thing; bond-women were their nurses, and
bondmen serve them still. Nor are all their serfs such wretches as
those we saw. Some seem happy: yet not as men. Unmanned, they know not
what they are. And though, of all the south, Nulli must stand almost
alone in his insensate creed; yet, to all wrong-doers, custom backs the
sense of wrong. And if to every Mardian, conscience be the awarder of
its own doom; then, of these tribes, many shall be found exempted from
the least penalty of this sin. But sin it is, no less;—a blot, foul as
the crater-pool of hell; it puts out the sun at noon; it parches all
fertility; and, conscience or no conscience—ere he die—let every master
who wrenches bond-babe from mother, that the nipple tear; unwreathes
the arms of sisters; or cuts the holy unity in twain; till apart fall
man and wife, like one bleeding body cleft:—let that master thrice
shrive his soul; take every sacrament; on his bended knees give up the
ghost;—yet shall he die despairing; and live again, to die forever
damned. The future is all hieroglyphics. Who may read? But, methinks
the great laggard Time must now march up apace, and somehow befriend
these thralls. It can not be, that misery is perpetually entailed;
though, in a land proscribing primogeniture, the first-born and last of
Hamo’s tribe must still succeed to all their sires’ wrongs. Yes.
Time—all-healing Time—Time, great Philanthropist!—Time must befriend
these thralls!”

“Oro grant it!” cried Yoomy “and let Mardi say, amen!”

“Amen! amen! amen!” cried echoes echoing echoes.

We traversed many of these southern vales; but as in Dominora,—so,
throughout Vivenza, North and South,—Yillah harbored not.




CHAPTER LIX.
They Converse Of The Mollusca, Kings, Toad-Stools And Other Matters


Once more embarking, we gained Vivenza’s southwestern side and there,
beheld vast swarms of laborers discharging from canoes, great loads of
earth; which they tossed upon the beach.

“It is true, then,” said Media “that these freemen are engaged in
digging down other lands, and adding them to their own, piece-meal. And
this, they call extending their dominions agriculturally, and
peaceably.”

“My lord, they pay a price for every canoe-load,” said Mohi.

“Ay, old man, holding the spear in one hand, and striking the bargain
with the other.”

“Yet charge it not upon all Vivenza,” said Babbalanja. “Some of her
tribes are hostile to these things: and when their countryman fight for
land, are only warlike in opposing war.”

“And therein, Babbalanja, is involved one of those anomalies in the
condition of Vivenza,” said Media, “which I can hardly comprehend. How
comes it, that with so Many things to divide them, the valley-tribes
still keep their mystic league intact?”

“All plain, it is because the model, whence they derive their union, is
one of nature’s planning. My lord, have you ever observed the
mysterious federation subsisting among the molluscs of the Tunicata
order,—in other words, a species of cuttle-fish, abounding at the
bottom of the lagoon?”

“Yes: in clear weather about the reefs, I have beheld them time and
again: but never with an eye to their political condition.”

“Ah! my lord king, we should not cut off the nervous communication
between our eyes, and our cerebellums.”

“What were you about to say concerning the Tunicata order of mollusca,
sir philosopher?”

“My very honorable lord, I hurry to conclude. They live in a compound
structure; but though connected by membranous canals, freely
communicating throughout the league—each member has a heart and stomach
of its own; provides and digests its own dinners; and grins and bears
its own gripes, without imparting the same to its neighbors. But if a
prowling shark touches one member, it ruffles all. Precisely thus now
with Vivenza. In that confederacy, there are as many consciences as
tribes; hence, if one member on its own behalf, assumes aught
afterwards repudiated, the sin rests on itself alone; is not
participated.”

“A very subtle explanation, Babbalanja. You must allude, then, to those
recreant tribes; which, while in their own eyes presenting a sublime
moral spectacle to Mardi,—in King Bello’s, do but present a hopeless
example of bad debts. And these, the tribes that boast of boundless
wealth.”

“Most true, my lord. But Bello errs, when for this thing, he
stigmatizes all Vivenza, as a unity.”

“Babbalanja, you yourself are made up of members:—then, if you be sick
of a lumbago,—’tis not _you_ that are unwell; but your spine.”

“As you will, my lord. I have said. But to speak no more on that head
—what sort of a sensation, think you, life is to such creatures as
those mollusca?”

“Answer your own question, Babbalanja.”

“I will; but first tell me what sort of a sensation life is to you,
yourself, my lord.”

“Pray answer that along with the other, Azzageddi.”

“Directly; but tell me, if you will, my lord, what sort of a sensation
life is to a toad-stool.”

“Pray, Babbalanja put all three questions together; and then, do what
you have often done before, pronounce yourself a lunatic.”

“My lord, I beseech you, remind me not of that fact so often. It is
true, but annoying. Nor will any wise man call another a fool.”

“Do you take me for a mere man, then, Babbalanja, that you talk to me
thus?”

“My demi-divine lord and master, I was deeply concerned at your
indisposition last night:—may a loving subject inquire, whether his
prince is completely recovered from the effect of those guavas?”

“Have a care, Azzageddi; you are far too courteous, to be civil. But
proceed.”

“I obey. In kings, mollusca, and toad-stools, life is one thing and the
same. The Philosopher Dumdi pronounces it a certain febral vibration of
organic parts, operating upon the vis inertia of unorganized matter.
But Bardianna says nay. Hear him. ‘Who put together this marvelous
mechanism of mine; and wound it up, to go for three score years and
ten; when it runs out, and strikes Time’s hours no more? And what is
it, that daily and hourly renews, and by a miracle, creates in me my
flesh and my blood? What keeps up the perpetual telegraphic
communication between my outpost toes and digits, and that domed
grandee up aloft, my brain?—It is not I; nor you; nor he; nor it. No;
when I place my hand to that king muscle my heart, I am appalled. I
feel the great God himself at work in me. Oro is life.’”

“And what is death?” demanded Media.

“Death, my lord!—it is the deadest of all things.”




CHAPTER LX.
Wherein, That Gallant Gentleman And Demi-God, King Media, Scepter In
Hand, Throws Himself Into The Breach


Sailing south from Vivenza, not far from its coast, we passed a cluster
of islets, green as new fledged grass; and like the mouths of floating
cornucopias, their margins brimmed over upon the brine with flowers. On
some, grew stately roses; on others stood twin-pillars; across others,
tri-hued rainbows rested.

Cried Babbalanja, pointing to the last, “Franko’s pledge of peace! with
that, she loudly vaunts she’ll span the reef!—Strike out all hues but
red,—and the token’s nearer truth.”

All these isles were prolific gardens; where King Bello, and the
Princes of Porpheero grew their most delicious fruits,—nectarines and
grapes.

But, though hard by, Vivenza owned no garden here; yet longed and
lusted; and her hottest tribes oft roundly swore, to root up all roses
the half-reef over; pull down all pillars; and dissolve all rainbows.
“Mardi’s half is ours;” said they. Stand back invaders! Full of vanity;
and mirroring themselves in the future; they deemed all reflected
there, their own.

’Twas now high noon.

“Methinks the sun grows hot,” said Media, retreating deeper under the
canopy. “Ho! Vee-Vee; have you no cooling beverage? none of that golden
wine distilled from torrid grapes, and then sent northward to be
cellared in an iceberg? That wine was placed among our stores. Search,
search the crypt, little Vee-Vee! Ha, I see it!—that yellow
gourd!—Come: drag it forth, my boy. Let’s have the amber cups: so: pass
them round;—fill all! Taji! my demi-god, up heart! Old Mohi, my babe,
may you live ten thousand centuries! Ah! this way you mortals have of
dying out at three score years and ten, is but a craven habit. So,
Babbalanja! may you never die. Yoomy! my sweet poet, may you live to
sing to me in Paradise. Ha, ha! would that we floated in this glorious
stuff, instead of this pestilent brine.—Hark ye! were I to make a Mardi
now, I’d have every continent a huge haunch of venison; every ocean a
wine-vat! I’d stock every cavern with choice old spirits, and make
three surplus suns to ripen the grapes all the year round. Let’s drink
to that!—Brimmers! So: may the next Mardi that’s made, be one entire
grape; and mine the squeezing!”

“Look, look! my lord,” cried Yoomy, “what a glorious shore we pass.”

Sallying out into the high golden noon, with golden-beaming goblets
suspended, we gazed.

“This must be Kolumbo of the south,” said Mohi.

It was a long, hazy reach of land; piled up in terraces, traced here
and there with rushing streams, that worked up gold dust alluvian, and
seemed to flash over pebbled diamonds. Heliotropes, sun-flowers,
marigolds gemmed, or starred the violet meads, and vassal-like, still
sunward bowed their heads. The rocks were pierced with grottoes,
blazing with crystals, many-tinted.

It was a land of mints and mines; its east a ruby; west a topaz.
Inland, the woodlands stretched an ocean, bottomless with foliage; its
green surges bursting through cable-vines; like Xerxes’ brittle chains
which vainly sought to bind the Hellespont. Hence flowed a tide of
forest sounds; of parrots, paroquets, macaws; blent with the howl of
jaguars, hissing of anacondas, chattering of apes, and herons
screaming.

Out from those depths up rose a stream.

The land lay basking in the world’s round torrid brisket, hot with
solar fire.

“No need here to land,” cried Yoomy, “Yillah lurks not here.”

“Heat breeds life, and sloth, and rage,” said Babbalanja. “Here live
bastard tribes and mongrel nations; wrangling and murdering to prove
their freedom.—Refill, my lord.”

“Methinks, Babbalanja, you savor of the mysterious parchment, in
Vivenza read:—Ha? Yes, philosopher, these are the men, who toppled
castles to make way for hovels; these, they who fought for freedom, but
find it despotism to rule themselves. These, Babbalanja, are of the
race, to whom a tyrant would prove a blessing.” So saying he drained
his cup.

“My lord, that last sentiment decides the authorship of the scroll.
But, with deference, tyrants seldom can prove blessings; inasmuch as
evil seldom eventuates in good. Yet will these people soon have a
tyrant over them, if long they cleave to war. Of many javelins, one
must prove a scepter; of many helmets, one a crown. It is but in the
wearing.—Refill, my lord.”

“Fools, fools!” cried Media, “these tribes hate us kings; yet know not,
that Peace is War against all kings. We seldom are undone by spears,
which are our ministers.—This wine is strong.”

“Ha, now’s the time! In his cups learn king-craft from a king. Ay, ay,
my lord, your royal order will endure, so long as men will fight. Break
the spears, and free the nations. Kings reap the harvests that wave on
battle-fields. And oft you kings do snatch the aloe-flower, whose slow
blossoming mankind watches for a hundred years.—Say on, my lord.”

“All this I know; and, therefore, rest content. My children’s children
will be kings; though, haply, called by other titles. Mardi grows
fastidious in names: we royalties will humor it. The steers would burst
their yokes, but have not hands. The whole herd rears and plunges, but
soon will bow again: the old, old way!”

“Yet, in Porpheero, strong scepters have been wrested from anointed
hands. Mankind seems in arms.”

“Let them arm on. They hate us:—good;—they always have; yet still we’ve
reigned, son after sire. Sometimes they slay us, Babbalanja; pour out
our marrow, as I this wine; but they spill no kinless blood. ’Twas
justly held of old, that but to touch a monarch, was to strike at
Oro.—Truth. The palest vengeance is a royal ghost; and regicides but
father slaves. Thrones, not scepters, have been broken. Mohi, what of
the past? Has it not ever proved so?”

“Pardon, my lord; the times seem changed. ’Tis held, that demi-gods no
more rule by right divine. In Vivenza’s land, they swear the last kings
now reign in Mardi.”

“Is the last day at hand, old man? Mohi, your beard is gray; but,
Yoomy, listen. When you die, look around; mark then if any mighty
change be seen. Old kingdoms may be on the wane; but new dynasties
advance. Though revolutions rise to high spring-tide, monarchs will
still drown hard;—monarchs survived the flood!”

“Are all our dreams, then, vain?” sighed Yoomy. “Is this no dawn of day
that streaks the crimson East! Naught but the false and flickering
lights which sometimes mock Aurora in the north! Ah, man, my brother!
have all martyrs for thee bled in vain; in vain we poets sang, and
prophets spoken? Nay, nay; great Mardi, helmed and mailed, strikes at
Oppression’s shield, and challenges to battle! Oro will defend the
right, and royal crests must roll.”

“Thus, Yoomy, ages since, you mortal poets sang; but the world may not
be moved from out the orbit in which first it rolled. On the map that
charts the spheres, Mardi is marked ‘the world of kings.’ Round
centuries on centuries have wheeled by:—has all this been its nonage?
Now, when the rocks grow gray, does man first sprout his beard? Or, is
your golden time, your equinoctial year, at hand, that your race fast
presses toward perfection; and every hand grasps at a scepter, that
kings may be no more?”

“But free Vivenza! Is she not the star, that must, ere long, lead up
the constellations, though now unrisen? No kings are in Vivenza; yet,
spite her thralls, in that land seems more of good than elsewhere. Our
hopes are not wild dreams: Vivenza cheers our hearts. She is a rainbow
to the isles!”

“Ay, truth it is, that in Vivenza they have prospered. But thence it
comes not, that all men may be as they. Are all men of one heart and
brain; one bone and sinew? Are all nations sprung of Dominora’s loins?
Or, has Vivenza yet proved her creed? Yoomy! the years that prove a
man, prove not a nation. But two kings’-reigns have passed since
Vivenza was a monarch’s. Her climacteric is not come; hers is not yet a
nation’s manhood even; though now in childhood, she anticipates her
youth, and lusts for empire like any czar. Yoomy! judge not yet. Time
hath tales to tell. Many books, and many long, long chapters, are
wanting to Vivenza’s history; and whet history but is full of blood?”

“There stop, my lord,” said Babbalanja, “nor aught predict. Fate laughs
at prophets; and of all birds, the raven is a liar!”




CHAPTER LXI.
They Round The Stormy Cape Of Capes


Long leagues, for weary days, we voyaged along that coast, till we came
to regions where we multiplied our mantles.

The sky grew overcast. Each a night, black storm-clouds swept the
wintry sea; and like Sahara caravans, which leave their sandy wakes—
so, thick and fleet, slanted the scud behind. Through all this rack and
mist, ten thousand foam-flaked dromedary-humps uprose.

Deep among those panting, moaning fugitives, the three canoes raced on.

And now, the air grew nipping cold. The clouds shed off their fleeces;
a snow-hillock, each canoe; our beards, white-frosted.

And so, as seated in our shrouds, we sailed in among great mountain
passes of ice-isles; from icy ledges scaring shivering seals, and white
bears, musical with icicles, jingling from their shaggy ermine.

Far and near, in towering ridges, stretched the glassy Andes; with
their own frost, shuddering through all their domes and pinnacles.
Ice-splinters rattled down the cliffs, and seethed into the sea.

Broad away, in amphitheaters undermined by currents, whole cities of
ice-towers, in crashes, toward one center, fell.—In their earthquakes,
Lisbon and Lima never saw the like. Churned and broken in the boiling
tide, they swept off amain;—over and over rolling; like porpoises to
vessels tranced in calms, bringing down the gale.

At last, rounding an antlered headland, that seemed a moose at bay—ere
long, we launched upon blue lake-like waters, serene as Windermere, or
Horicon. Thus, from the boisterous storms of youth, we glide upon
senility.

But as we northward voyaged, another aspect wore the sea.

In far-off, endless vistas, colonnades of water-spouts were seen: all
heaven’s dome upholding on their shafts: and bright forms gliding up
and down within. So at Luz, in his strange vision, Jacob saw the
angels.

A boundless cave of stalactites, it seemed; the cloud-born vapors
downward spiraling, till they met the whirlpool-column from the sea;
then, uniting, over the waters stalked, like ghosts of gods. Or midway
sundered—down, sullen, sunk the watery half; and far up into heaven,
was drawn the vapory. As, at death, we mortals part in twain; our
earthy half still here abiding; but our spirits flying whence they
came.

In good time, we gained the thither side of great Kolumbo of the South;
and sailing on, long waited for the day; and wondered at the darkness.

“What steadfast clouds!” cried Yoomy, “yonder! far aloft: that ridge,
with many points; it fades below, but shows a faint white crest.”

“Not clouds, but mountains,” said Babbalanja, “the vast spine, that
traverses Kolumbo; spurring off in ribs, that nestle loamy valleys,
veined with silver streams, and silver ores.”

It was a long, embattled line of pinnacles. And high posted in the
East, those thousand bucklered peaks stood forth, and breasted back the
Dawn. Before their purple bastions bold, Aurora long arrayed her
spears, and clashed her golden shells. The summons dies away. But now,
her lancers charge the steep, and gain its crest a-glow;—their
glittering spears and blazoned shields triumphant in the morn.

But ere that sight, we glided on for hours in twilight; when, on those
mountains’ farther side, the hunters must have been abroad, morning-
glories all astir.




CHAPTER LXII.
They Encounter Gold-Hunters


Now, northward coasting along Kolumbo’s Western shore, whence came the
same wild forest-sounds, as from the Eastern; and where we landed not,
to seek among those wrangling tribes;—after many, many days, we spied
prow after prow, before the wind all northward bound: sails
wide-spread, and paddles plying: scaring the fish from before them.

Their inmates answered not our earnest hail.

But as they sped, with frantic glee, in one long chorus thus they
sang:—

                        We rovers bold,
                    To the land of Gold,
                Over bowling billows are gliding:
                    Eager to toil,
                    For the golden spoil,
                And every hardship biding.
                        See! See!
                Before our prows’ resistless dashes,
                The gold-fish fly in golden flashes!
                    ’Neath a sun of gold,
                    We rovers bold,
                On the golden land are gaining;
                And every night,
                We steer aright,
            By golden stars unwaning!
        All fires burn a golden glare:
        No locks so bright as golden hair!
    All orange groves have golden gushings:
    All mornings dawn with golden flushings!
In a shower of gold, say fables old,
A maiden was won by the god of gold!
    In golden goblets wine is beaming:
    On golden couches kings are dreaming!
    The Golden Rule dries many tears!
    The Golden Number rules the spheres!
Gold, gold it is, that sways the nations:
Gold! gold! the center of all rotations!
    On golden axles worlds are turning:
    With phosphorescence seas are burning!
    All fire-flies flame with golden gleamings:
    Gold-hunters’ hearts with golden dreamings!
    With golden arrows kings are slain:
    With gold we’ll buy a freeman’s name!
In toilsome trades, for scanty earnings,
At home we’ve slaved, with stifled yearnings:
No light! no hope! Oh, heavy woe!
When nights fled fast, and days dragged slow.
            But joyful now, with eager eye,
            Fast to the Promised Land we fly:
                Where in deep mines,
                The treasure shines;
            Or down in beds of golden streams,
            The gold-flakes glance in golden gleams!
                How we long to sift,
                That yellow drift!
            Rivers! Rivers! cease your going!
                Sand-bars! rise, and stay the tide!
            ’Till we’ve gained the golden flowing;
                And in the golden haven ride!


“Quick, quick, my lord,” cried Yoomy, “let us follow them; and from the
golden waters where she lies, our Yillah may emerge.”

“No, no,” said Babbalanja,—“no Yillah there!—from yonder promised-land,
fewer seekers will return, than go. Under a gilded guise, happiness is
still their instinctive aim. But vain, Yoomy, to snatch at Happiness.
Of that we may not pluck and eat. It is the fruit of our own toilsome
planting; slow it grows, nourished by many teats, and all our earnest
tendings. Yet ere it ripen, frosts may nip;—and then, we plant again;
and yet again. Deep, Yoomy, deep, true treasure lies; deeper than all
Mardi’s gold, rooted to Mardi’s axis. But unlike gold, it lurks in
every soil,—all Mardi over. With golden pills and potions is sickness
warded off?—the shrunken veins of age, dilated with new wine of youth?
Will gold the heart-ache cure? turn toward us hearts estranged? will
gold, on solid centers empires fix? ’Tis toil world-wasted to toil in
mines. Were all the isles gold globes, set in a quicksilver sea, all
Mardi were then a desert. Gold is the only poverty; of all glittering
ills the direst. And that man might not impoverish himself thereby, Oro
hath hidden it, with all other banes,—saltpeter and explosives, deep in
mountain bowels, and river-beds. But man still will mine for it; and
mining, dig his doom.— Yoomy, Yoomy!—she we seek, lurks not in the
Golden Hills!”

“Lo, a vision!” cried Yoomy, his hands wildly passed across his eyes.
“A vast and silent bay, belted by silent villages:—gaunt dogs howling
over grassy thresholds at stark corpses of old age and infancy; gray
hairs mingling with sweet flaxen curls; fields, with turned furrows,
choked with briers; arbor-floors strown over with hatchet-helves,
rotting in the iron; a thousand paths, marked with foot-prints, all
inland leading, none villageward; and strown with traces, as of a
flying host. On: over forest—hill, and dale—and lo! the golden region!
After the glittering spoil, by strange river-margins, and beneath
impending cliffs, thousands delve in quicksands; and, sudden, sink in
graves of their own making: with gold dust mingling their own ashes.
Still deeper, in more solid ground, other thousands slave; and pile
their earth so high, they gasp for air, and die; their comrades
mounting on them, and delving still, and dying—grave pile on grave!
Here, one haggard hunter murders another in his pit; and murdering,
himself is murdered by a third. Shrieks and groans! cries and curses!
It seems a golden Hell! With many camels, a sleek stranger comes—
pauses before the shining heaps, and shows _his_ treasures: yams and
bread-fruit. ‘Give, give,’ the famished hunters cry—, ‘a thousand
shekels for a yam!—a prince’s ransom for a meal!—Oh, stranger! on our
knees we worship thee:—take, take our gold; but let us live!’ Yams are
thrown them and they fight. Then he who toiled not, dug not, slaved
not, straight loads his caravans with gold; regains the beach, and
swift embarks for home. ‘Home! home!’ the hunters cry, with bursting
eyes. ‘With this bright gold, could we but join our waiting wives, who
wring their hands on distant shores, all then were well. But we can not
fly; our prows lie rotting on the beach. Ah! home! thou only
happiness!—better thy silver earnings than all these golden findings.
Oh, bitter end to all our hopes—we die in golden graves.”




CHAPTER LXIII.
They Seek Through The Isles Of Palms; And Pass The Isles Of Myrrh


Now, our prows we turned due west, across the blue lagoon.

Soon, no land appeared. Far as the eye could sweep, one azure plain;
all over flaked with foamy fleeces:—a boundless flock upon a boundless
mead!

Again, all changed. Like stars in multitude, bright islets multiplied
around. Emerald-green, they dotted shapes fantastic: circles, arcs, and
crescents;—atolls all, or coral carcanets, begemmed and flashing in the
sun.

By these we glided, group after group; and through the foliage, spied
sweet forms of maidens, like Eves in Edens ere the Fall, or Proserpines
in Ennas. Artless airs came from the shore; and from the
censer-swinging roses, a bloom, as if from Hebe’s cheek.

“Here, at last, we find sweet Yillah!” murmured Yoomy. “Here must she
lurk in innocence! Quick! Let us land and search.”

“If here,” said Babbalanja, “Yillah will not stay our coming, but fly
before us through the groves. Wherever a canoe is beached, see you not
the palm-trees pine? Not so, where never keel yet smote the strand. In
mercy, let us fly from hence. I know not why, but our breath here, must
prove a blight.”

These regions passed, we came to savage islands, where the glittering
coral seemed bones imbedded, bleaching in the sun. Savage men stood
naked on the strand, and brandished uncouth clubs, and gnashed their
teeth like boars.

The full red moon was rising; and, in long review there passed before
it, phantom shapes of victims, led bound to altars through the groves.
Death-rattles filled the air. But a cloud descended, and all was gloom.

Again blank water spread before us; and after many days, there came a
gentle breeze, fraught with all spicy breathings; cinnamon aromas; and
in the rose-flushed evening air, like glow worms, glowed the islets,
where this incense burned.

“Sweet isles of myrh! oh crimson groves,” cried Yoomy. “Woe, woe’s your
fate! your brightness and your bloom, like musky fire-flies,
double-lure to death! On ye, the nations prey like bears that gorge
themselves with honey.”

Swan-like, our prows sailed in among these isles; and oft we landed;
but in vain; and leaving them, we still pursued the setting sun.




CHAPTER LXIV.
Concentric, Inward, With Mardi’s Reef, They Leave Their Wake Around The
World


West, West! West, West! Whitherward point Hope and prophet-fingers;
whitherward, at sun-set, kneel all worshipers of fire; whitherward in
mid-ocean, the great whales turn to die; whitherward face all the
Moslem dead in Persia; whitherward lie Heaven and Hell!—West, West!
Whitherward mankind and empires—flocks, caravans, armies, navies;
worlds, suns, and stars all wend!—West, West!—Oh boundless boundary!
Eternal goal! Whitherward rush, in thousand worlds, ten thousand
thousand keels! Beacon, by which the universe is steered!—Like the
north-star, attracting all needles! Unattainable forever; but forever
leading to great things this side thyself!—Hive of all sunsets!—
Gabriel’s pinions may not overtake thee!

Over balmy waves, still westward sailing! From dawn till eve, the
bright, bright days sped on, chased by the gloomy nights; and, in glory
dying, lent their luster to the starry skies. So, long the radiant
dolphins fly before the sable sharks but seized, and torn in
flames—die, burning:—their last splendor left, in sparkling scales that
float along the sea.

Cymbals, drums and psalteries! the air beats like a pulse with music!
—High land! high land! and moving lights, and painted lanterns!—What
grand shore is this?

“Reverence we render thee, Old Orienda!” cried Media, with bared brow,
“Original of all empires and emperors!—a crowned king salutes thee!”

“Mardi’s father-land!” cried Mohi, “grandsire of the nations,—hail!”

“All hail!” cried Yoomy. “Kings and sages hither coming, should come
like palmers,—scrip and staff! Oh Orienda! thou wert our East, where
first dawned song and science, with Mardi’s primal mornings! But now,
how changed! the dawn of light become a darkness, which we kindle with
the gleam of spears! On the world’s ancestral hearth, we spill our
brothers’ blood!”

“Herein,” said Babbalanja, “have many distant tribes proved parricidal.
In times gone by, Luzianna hither sent her prom; Franko, her scores of
captains; and the Dykemen, their peddler hosts, with yard-stick spears!
But thou, oh Bello! lord of the empire lineage! Noah of the moderns.
Sire of the long line of nations yet in germ!— thou, Bello, and thy
locust armies, are the present curse of Orienda. Down ancient streams,
from holy plains, in rafts thy murdered float! The pestilence that
thins thy armies here, is bred of corpses, made by thee. Maramma’s
priests, thy pious heralds, loud proclaim that of all pagans, Orienda’s
most resist the truth!—ay! vain all pious voices, that speak from
clouds of war! The march of conquest through wild provinces, may be the
march of Mind; but not the march of Love.”

“Thou, Bello!” cried Yoomy, “would’st wrest the crook from Alma’s hand,
and place in it a spear. But vain to make a conqueror of him, who put
off the purple when he came to Mardi; and declining gilded miters,
entered the nations meekly on an ass.”

“Oh curse of commerce!” cried Babbalanja, “that it barters souls for
gold. Bello! with opium, thou wouldst drug this land, and murder it in
sleep!—And what boot thy conquests here? Seed sown by spears but seldom
springs; and harvests reaped thereby, are poisoned by the sickle’s
edge.”

Yet on, and on we coasted; counting not the days.

“Oh, folds and flocks of nations! dusky tribes innumerable!” cried
Yoomy, “camped on plains and steppes; on thousand mountains, worshiping
the stars; in thousand valleys, offering up first-fruits, till all the
forests seem in flames;—where, in fire, the widow’s spirit mounts to
meet her lord!—Oh, Orienda, in thee ’tis vain to seek our Yillah!”

“How dark as death the night!” said Mohi, shaking the dew from his
braids, “the Heavens blaze not here with stars, as over Dominora’s
land, and broad Vivenza.”

One only constellation was beheld; but every star was brilliant as the
one, that promises the morning. That constellation was the Crux-
Australis,—the badge, and type of Alma.

And now, southwest we steered, till another island vast, was reached;
—Hamora! far trending toward the Antarctic Pole.

Coasting on by barbarous beaches, where painted men, with spears,
charged on all attempts to land, at length we rounded a mighty bluff,
lit by a beacon; and heard a bugle call:—Bello’s! hurrying to their
quarters, the World-End’s garrison.

Here, the sea rolled high, in mountain surges: mid which, we toiled and
strained, as if ascending cliffs of Caucasus.

But not long thus. As when from howling Rhoetian heights, the traveler
spies green Lombardy below, and downward rushes toward that pleasant
plain; so, sloping from long rolling swells, at last we launched upon
the calm lagoon.

But as we northward sailed, once more the storm-trump blew, and
charger-like, the seas ran mustering to the call; and in battalions
crouched before a towering rock, far distant from the main. No moon,
eclipsed in Egypt’s skies, looked half so lone. But from out that
darkness, on the loftiest peak, Bello’s standard waved.

“Oh rifled tomb!” cried Babbalanja. “Wherein lay the Mars and Moloch of
our times, whose constellated crown, was gemmed with diadems. Thou god
of war! who didst seem the devouring Beast of the Apocalypse; casting
so vast a shadow over Mardi, that yet it lingers in old Franko’s vale;
where still they start at thy tremendous ghost; and, late, have hailed
a phantom, King! Almighty hero-spell! that after the lapse of half a
century, can so bewitch all hearts! But one drop of hero-blood will
deify a fool.

“Franko! thou wouldst be free; yet thy free homage is to the buried
ashes of a King; thy first choice, the exaltation of his race. In
furious fires, thou burn’st Ludwig’s throne; and over thy new-made
chieftain’s portal, in golden letters print’st—‘The Palace of our
Lord!’ In thy New Dispensation, thou cleavest to the exploded Law. And
on Freedom’s altar—ah, I fear—still, may slay thy hecatombs. But
Freedom turns away; she is sick with burnt blood of offerings. Other
rituals she loves; and like Oro, unseen herself, would be worshiped
only by invisibles. Of long drawn cavalcades, pompous processions,
frenzied banners, mystic music, marching nations, she will none. Oh,
may thy peaceful Future, Franko, sanctify thy bloody Past. Let not
history say; ‘To her old gods, she turned again.’”

This rocky islet passed, the sea went down; once more we neared
Hamora’s western shore. In the deep darkness, here and there, its
margin was lit up by foam-white, breaking billows rolled over from
Vivenza’s strand, and down from northward Dominora; marking places
where light was breaking in, upon the interior’s jungle-gloom.

In heavy sighs, the night-winds from shore came over us.

“Ah, vain to seek sweet Yillah here,” cried Yoomy.—“Poor land! curst of
man, not Oro! how thou faintest for thy children, torn from thy soil,
to till a stranger’s. Vivenza! did these winds not spend their plaints,
ere reaching thee, thy every vale would echo them. Oh, tribe of Hamo!
thy cup of woe so brims, that soon it must overflow upon the land which
holds ye thralls. No misery born of crime, but spreads and poisons
wide. Suffering hunteth sin, as the gaunt hound the hare, and tears it
in the greenest brakes.”

Still on we sailed: and after many tranquil days and nights, a storm
came down, and burst its thousand bombs. The lightnings forked and
flashed; the waters boiled; our three prows lifted themselves in
supplication; but the billows smote them as they reared.

Said Babbalanja, bowing to the blast: “Thus, oh Vivenza! retribution
works! Though long delayed, it comes at last—Judgment, with all her
bolts.”

Now, a current seized us, and like three darts, our keels sped
eastward, through a narrow strait, far in, upon a smooth expanse, an
inland ocean, without a throb.

On our left, Porpheero’s southwest point, a mighty rock, long tiers of
galleries within, deck on deck; and flag-staffs, like an admiral’s
masts: a line-of-battle-ship, all purple stone, and anchored in the
sea. Here Bello’s lion crouched; and, through a thousand port-holes,
eyed the world.

On our right, Hamora’s northern shore gleamed thick with crescents;
numerous as the crosses along the opposing strand.

“How vain to say, that progress is the test of truth, my lord,” said
Babbalanja, “when, after many centuries, those crescents yet unwaning
shine, and count a devotee for every worshiper of yonder crosses. Truth
and Merit have other symbols than success; and in this mortal race, all
competitors may enter; and the field is clear for all. Side by side,
Lies run with Truths, and fools with wise; but, like geometric lines,
though they pierce infinity, never may they join.”

Over that tideless sea we sailed; and landed right, and landed left;
but the maiden never found; till, at last, we gained the water’s limit;
and inland saw great pointed masses, crowned with halos.

“Granite continents,” cried Babbalanja, “that seem created like the
planets, not built with human hands. Lo, Landmarks! upon whose flanks
Time leaves its traces, like old tide-rips of diluvian seas.”

As, after wandering round and round some purple dell, deep in a
boundless prairie’s heart, the baffled hunter plunges in; then,
despairing, turns once more to gain the open plain; even so we seekers
now curved round our keels; and from that inland sea emerged. The
universe again before us; our quest, as wide.




CHAPTER LXV.
Sailing On


Morning dawned upon the same mild, blue Lagoon as erst; and all the
lands that we had passed, since leaving Piko’s shore of spears, were
faded from the sight.

Part and parcel of the Mardian isles, they formed a cluster by
themselves; like the Pleiades, that shine in Taurus, and are eclipsed
by the red splendor of his fiery eye, and the thick clusterings of the
constellations round.

And as in Orion, to some old king-astronomer,—say, King of Rigel, or
Betelguese,—this Earth’s four quarters show but four points afar; so,
seem they to terrestrial eyes, that broadly sweep the spheres.

And, as the sun, by influence divine, wheels through the Ecliptic;
threading Cancer, Leo, Pisces, and Aquarius; so, by some mystic impulse
am I moved, to this fleet progress, through the groups in white-reefed
Mardi’s zone.

Oh, reader, list! I’ve chartless voyaged. With compass and the lead, we
had not found these Mardian Isles. Those who boldly launch, cast off
all cables; and turning from the common breeze, that’s fair for all,
with their own breath, fill their own sails. Hug the shore, naught new
is seen; and “Land ho!” at last was sung, when a new world was sought.

That voyager steered his bark through seas, untracked before; ploughed
his own path mid jeers; though with a heart that oft was heavy with the
thought, that he might only be too bold, and grope where land was none.

So I.

And though essaying but a sportive sail, I was driven from my course,
by a blast resistless; and ill-provided, young, and bowed to the brunt
of things before my prime, still fly before the gale;—hard have I
striven to keep stout heart.

And if it harder be, than e’er before, to find new climes, when now our
seas have oft been circled by ten thousand prows,—much more the glory!

But this new world here sought, is stranger far than his, who stretched
his vans from Palos. It is the world of mind; wherein the wanderer may
gaze round, with more of wonder than Balboa’s band roving through the
golden Aztec glades.

But fiery yearnings their own phantom-future make, and deem it present.
So, if after all these fearful, fainting trances, the verdict be, the
golden haven was not gained;—yet, in bold quest thereof, better to sink
in boundless deeps, than float on vulgar shoals; and give me, ye gods,
an utter wreck, if wreck I do.




CHAPTER LXVI.
A Flight Of Nightingales From Yoomy’s Mouth


By noon, down came a calm.

“Oh Neeva! good Neeva! kind Neeva! thy sweet breath, dear Neeva!”

So from his shark’s-mouth prayed little Vee-Vee to the god of Fair
Breezes. And along they swept; till the three prows neighed to the
blast; and pranced on their path, like steeds of Crusaders.

Now, that this fine wind had sprung up; the sun riding joyously in the
heavens; and the Lagoon all tossed with white, flying manes; Media
called upon Yoomy to ransack his whole assortment of songs:—warlike,
amorous, and sentimental,—and regale us with something inspiring for
too long the company had been gloomy.

“Thy best,” he cried.

Then will I e’en sing you a song, my lord, which is a song-full of
songs. I composed it long, long since, when Yillah yet bowered in Odo.
Ere now, some fragments have been heard. Ah, Taji! in this my lay, live
over again your happy hours. Some joys have thousand lives; can never
die; for when they droop, sweet memories bind them up.—My lord, I deem
these verses good; they came bubbling out of me, like live waters from
a spring in a silver mine. And by your good leave, my lord, I have much
faith in inspiration. Whoso sings is a seer.”

“Tingling is the test,” said Babbalanja, “Yoomy, did you tingle, when
that song was composing?”

“All over, Babbalanja.”

“From sole to crown?”

“From finger to finger.”

“My life for it! true poetry, then, my lord! For this self-same
tingling, I say, is the test.”

“And infused into a song,” cried Yoomy, “it evermore causes it so to
sparkle, vivify, and irradiate, that no son of man can repeat it
without tingling himself. This very song of mine may prove what I say.”

“Modest youth!” sighed Media.

“Not more so, than sincere,” said Babbalanja. “He who is frank, will
often appear vain, my lord. Having no guile, he speaks as freely of
himself, as of another; and is just as ready to honor his own merits,
even if imaginary, as to lament over undeniable deficiencies. Besides,
such men are prone to moods, which to shallow-minded, unsympathizing
mortals, make their occasional distrust of themselves, appear but as a
phase of self-conceit. Whereas, the man who, in the presence of his
very friends, parades a barred and bolted front,—that man so highly
prizes his sweet self, that he cares not to profane the shrine he
worships, by throwing open its portals. He is locked up; and Ego is the
key. Reserve alone is vanity. But all mankind are egotists. The world
revolves upon an I; and we upon ourselves; for we are our own
worlds:—all other men as strangers, from outlandish, distant climes,
going clad in furs. Then, whate’er they be, let us show our worlds; and
not seek to hide from men, what Oro knows.”

“Truth, my lord,” said Yoomy, “but all this applies to men in mass; not
specially, to my poor craft. Of all mortals, we poets are most subject
to contrary moods. Now, heaven over heaven in the skies; now layer
under layer in the dust. This, the penalty we pay for being what we
are. But Mardi only sees, or thinks it sees, the tokens of our
self-complacency: whereas, all our agonies operate unseen. Poets are
only seen when they soar.”

“The song! the song!” cried Media. “Never mind the metaphysics of
genius.”

And Yoomy, thus clamorously invoked, hemmed thrice, tuning his voice
for the air.

But here, be it said, that the minstrel was miraculously gifted with
three voices; and, upon occasions, like a mocking-bird, was a concert
of sweet sounds in himself. Had kind friends died, and bequeathed him
their voices? But hark! in a low, mild tenor, he begins:—

        Half-railed above the hills, yet rosy bright,
    Stands fresh, and fair, the meek and blushing morn!
So Yillah looks! her pensive eyes the stars,
    That mildly beam from out her cheek’s young dawn!

                But the still meek Dawn,
                Is not aye the form
                Of Yillah nor Morn!
                    Soon rises the sun,
                    Day’s race to run:
                His rays abroad,
                Flash each a sword,—
                    And merrily forth they flare!
                    Sun-music in the air!
                So Yillah now rises and flashes!
                Rays shooting from ont her long lashes,—
                    Sun-music in the air!

                    Her laugh! How it bounds!
                    Bright cascade of sounds!
                Peal after peal, and ringing afar,—
                Ringing of waters, that silvery jar,
                    From basin to basin fast falling!
                    Fast falling, and shining, and streaming:—
                Yillah’s bosom, the soft, heaving lake,
                Where her laughs at last dimple, and flake!

Oh beautiful Yillah! Thy step so free!—
    Fast fly the sea-ripples,
Revealing their dimples,
    When forth, thou hi’st to the frolicsome sea!

                 All the stars laugh,
                     When upward she looks:
                All the trees chat
                     In their woody nooks:
                All the brooks sing;
                All the caves ring;
                All the buds blossom;
                    All the boughs bound;
                All the birds carol;
                    And leaves turn round,
                    Where Yillah looks!

Light wells from her soul’s deep sun
Causing many toward her to run!
Vines to climb, and flowers to spring;
And youths their love by hundreds bring!


“Proceed, gentle Yoomy,” said Babbalanja.

“The meaning,” said Mohi.

“The sequel,” said Media.

“My lord, I have ceased in the middle; the end is not yet.”

“Mysticism!” cried Babbalanja. “What, minstrel; must nothing ultimate
come of all that melody? no final and inexhaustible meaning? nothing
that strikes down into the soul’s depths; till, intent upon itself, it
pierces in upon its own essence, and is resolved into its pervading
original; becoming a thing constituent of the all embracing deific;
whereby we mortals become part and parcel of the gods; our souls to
them as thoughts; and we privy to all things occult, ineffable, and
sublime? Then, Yoomy, is thy song nothing worth. Alla Mollolla saith,
‘That is no true, vital breath, which leaves no moisture behind.’ I
mistrust thee, minstrel! that thou hast not yet been impregnated by the
arcane mysteries; that thou dost not sufficiently ponder on the Adyta,
the Monads, and the Hyparxes; the Dianoias, the Unical Hypostases, the
Gnostic powers of the Psychical Essence, and the Supermundane and
Pleromatic Triads; to say nothing of the Abstract Noumenons.”

“Oro forbid!” cried Yoomy; “the very sound of thy words affrights me.”
Then, whispering to Mohi—“Is he daft again?”

“My brain is battered,” said Media. “Azzageddi! you must diet, and be
bled.”

“Ah!” sighed Babbalanja, turning; “how little they ween of the
Rudimental Quincunxes, and the Hecatic Spherula!”




CHAPTER LXVII.
They Visit One Doxodox


Next morning, we came to a deep, green wood, slowly nodding over the
waves; its margin frothy-white with foam. A charming sight!

While delighted, all our paddlers gazed, Media, observing Babbalanja
plunged in reveries, called upon him to awake; asking what might so
absorb him.

“Ah, my lord! what seraphic sounds have ye driven from me!”

“Sounds! Sure, there’s naught heard but yonder murmuring surf; what
other sound heard you?”

“The thrilling of my soul’s monochord, my lord. But prick not your ears
to hear it; that divine harmony is overheard by the rapt spirit alone;
it comes not by the auditory nerves.”

“No more, Azzageddi! No more of that. Look yonder!”

“A most lovely wood, in truth. And methinks it is here the sage
Doxodox, surnamed the Wise One, dwells.”

“Hark, I hear the hootings of his owls,” said Mohi.

“My lord, you must have read of him. He is said to have penetrated from
the zoned, to the unzoned principles. Shall we seek him out, that we
may hearken to his wisdom? Doubtless he knows many things, after which
we pant.”

The lagoon was calm, as we landed; not a breath stirred the plumes of
the trees; and as we entered the voiceless shades, lifting his hand,
Babbalanja whispered:—“This silence is a fit introduction to the
portals of Telestic lore. Somewhere, beneath this moss, lurks the
mystic stone Mnizuris; whereby Doxodox hath attained unto a knowledge
of the ungenerated essences. Nightly, he bathes his soul in
archangelical circumlucencies. Oh, Doxodox! whip me the Strophalunian
top! Tell o’er thy Jynges!”

“Down, Azzageddi! down!” cried Media. “Behold: there sits the Wise One;
now, for true wisdom!”

From the voices of the party, the sage must have been aware of our
approach: but seated on a green bank, beneath the shade of a red
mulberry, upon the boughs of which, many an owl was perched, he seemed
intent upon describing divers figures in the air, with a jet-black
wand.

Advancing with much deference and humility, Babbalanja saluted him.

“Oh wise Doxodox! Drawn hither by thy illustrious name, we seek
admittance to thy innermost wisdom. Of all Mardian, thou alone
comprehendest those arcane combinations, whereby to drag to day the
most deftly hidden things, present and to come. Thou knowest what we
are, and what we shall be. We beseech thee, evoke thy Tselmns!”

“Tetrads; Pentads; Hexads; Heptads; Ogdoads:—meanest thou those?”

“New terms all!”

“Foiled at thy own weapons,” said Media.

“Then, if thou comprehendest not my nomenclature:—how my science? But
let me test thee in the portico.—Why is it, that as some things extend
more remotely than others; so, Quadammodotatives are larger than
Qualitatives; forasmuch, as Quadammodotatives extend to those things,
which include the Quadammodotatives themselves.”

“Azzageddi has found his match,” said Media.

“Still posed, Babbalanja?” asked Mohi.

“At a loss, most truly! But I beseech thee, wise Doxodox! instruct me
in thy dialectics, that I may embrace thy more recondite lore.”

“To begin then, my child:—all Dicibles reside in the mind.”

“But what are Dicibles?” said Media.

“Meanest thou, Perfect or Imperfect Dicibles?” Any kind you please;—
but what are they?”

“Perfect Dicibles are of various sorts: Interrogative; Percontative;
Adjurative; Optative; Imprecative; Execrative; Substitutive;
Compellative; Hypothetical; and lastly, Dubious.”

“Dubious enough! Azzageddi! forever, hereafter, hold thy peace.”

“Ah, my children! I must go back to my Axioms.”

“And what are they?” said old Mohi.

“Of various sorts; which, again, are diverse. Thus: my contrary axioms
are Disjunctive, and Subdisjunctive; and so, with the rest. So, too, in
degree, with my Syllogisms.”

“And what of them?”

“Did I not just hint what they were, my child? I repeat, they are of
various sorts: Connex, and Conjunct, for example.”

“And what of them?” persisted Mohi; while Babbalanja, arms folded,
stood serious and mute; a sneer on his lip.

“As with other branches of my dialectics: so, too, in their way, with
my Syllogisms. Thus: when I say,—If it be warm, it is not cold:— that’s
a simple Sumption. If I add, But it is warm:—that’s an _Ass_umption.”

“So called from the syllogist himself, doubtless;” said Mohi, stroking
his beard.

“Poor ignorant babe! no. Listen:—if finally, I say,—Therefore it is not
cold that’s the final inference.”

“And a most triumphant one it is!” cried Babbalanja. “Thrice profound,
and sapient Doxodox! Light of Mardi! and Beacon of the Universe! didst
ever hear of the Shark-Syllogism?”

“Though thy epithets be true, my child, I distrust thy sincerity. I
have not yet heard of the syllogism to which thou referrest.”

“It was thus. A shark seized a swimmer by the leg; addressing him:
‘Friend, I will liberate you, if you truly answer whether you think I
purpose harm.’ Well knowing that sharks seldom were magnanimous, he
replied: Kind sir, you mean me harm; now go your ways.’ ‘No, no; my
conscience forbids. Nor will I falsify the words of so veracious a
mortal. You were to answer truly; but you say I mean you harm:—so harm
it is:—here goes your leg.’”

“Profane jester! Would’st thou insult me with thy torn-foolery?
Begone—all of ye! tramp! pack! I say: away with ye!” and into the woods
Doxodox himself disappeared.

“Bravely done, Babbalanja!” cried Media. “You turned the corner to
admiration.”

“I have hopes of our Philosopher yet,” said Mohi.

“Outrageous impostor! fool, dotard, oaf! Did he think to bejuggle me
with his preposterous gibberish? And is this shallow phraseman the
renowned Doxodox whom I have been taught so highly to reverence? Alas,
alas—Odonphi there is none!”

“His fit again,” sighed Yoomy.




CHAPTER LXVIII.
King Media Dreams


That afternoon was melting down to eve; all but Media broad awake; yet
all motionless, as the slumberer upon the purple mat. Sailing on, with
open eyes, we slept the wakeful sleep of those, who to the body only
give repose, while the spirit still toils on, threading her mountain
passes.

King Media’s slumbers were like the helmed sentry’s in the saddle. From
them, he started like an antlered deer, bursting from out a copse. Some
said he never slept; that deep within himself he but intensified the
hour; or, leaving his crowned brow in marble quiet, unseen, departed to
far-off councils of the gods. Howbeit, his lids never closed; in the
noonday sun, those crystal eyes, like diamonds, sparkled with a fixed
light.

As motionless we thus reclined, Media turned and muttered:—“Brother
gods, and demi-gods, it is not well. These mortals should have less or
more. Among my subjects is a man, whose genius scorns the common
theories of things; but whose still mortal mind can not fathom the
ocean at his feet. His soul’s a hollow, wherein he raves.”

“List, list,” whispered Yoomy—“our lord is dreaming; and what a royal
dream.”

“A very royal and imperial dream,” said Babbalanja—“he is arraigning me
before high heaven;—ay, ay; in dreams, at least, he deems himself a
demi-god.”

“Hist,” said Mohi—“he speaks again.”

“Gods and demi-gods! With one gesture all abysses we may disclose; and
before this Mardi’s eyes, evoke the shrouded time to come. Were this
well? Like lost children groping in the woods, they falter through
their tangled paths; and at a thousand angles, baffled, start upon each
other. And even when they make an onward move, ’tis but an endless
vestibule, that leads to naught. In my own isle of Odo—Odo! Odo! How
rules my viceroy there?—Down, down, ye madding mobs! Ho, spearmen,
charge! By the firmament, but my halberdiers fly!”

“His dream has changed,” said Babbalanja. “He is in Odo, whither his
anxieties impel him.”

“Hist, hist,” said Yoomy.

“I leap upon the soil! Render thy account, Almanni! Where’s my throne?
Mohi, am I not a king? Do not thy chronicles record me? Yoomy, am I not
the soul of some one glorious song? Babbalanja, speak.—Mohi! Yoomy!”

“What is it, my lord? thou dost but dream.”

Staring wildly; then calmly gazing round, Media smiled. “Ha! how we
royalties ramble in our dreams! I’ve told no secrets?”

“While he seemed to sleep, my lord spoke much,” said Mohi.

“I knew it not, old man; nor would now; but that ye tell me.”

“We dream not ourselves,” said Babbalanja, “but the thing within us.”

“Ay?—good-morrow Azzageddi!—But come; no more dreams: Vee-Vee! wine.”

And straight through that livelong night, immortal Media plied the can.




CHAPTER LXIX.
After A Long Interval, By Night They Are Becalmed


Now suns rose, and set; moons grew, and waned; till, at last, the star
that erewhile heralded the dawn, presaged the eve; to us, sad token!—
while deep within the deepest heart of Mardi’s circle, we sailed from
sea to sea; and isle to isle; and group to group;—vast empires
explored, and inland valleys, to their utmost heads; and for every ray
in heaven, beheld a king.

Needless to recount all that then befell; what tribes and caravans we
saw; what vast horizons; boundless plains: and sierras, in their every
intervale, a nation nestling.

Enough that still we roamed.

It was evening; and as the red sun, magnified, launched into the wave,
once more, from a wild strand, we launched our three canoes.

Soon, from her clouds, hooded Night, like a nun from a convent, drew
nigh. Rustled her train, yet no spangles were there. But high on her
brow, still shone her pale crescent; haloed by bandelets—violet, red,
and yellow. So looked the lone watcher through her rainbow-iris; so
sad, the night without stars.

The winds were laid; the lagoon, still, as a prairie of an August noon.

“Let us dream out the calm,” said Media. “One of ye paddlers, watch: Ho
companions! who’s for Cathay?”

Sleep reigned throughout the canoes, sleeping upon the waters. But
nearer and nearer, low-creeping along, came mists and vapors, a
thousand; spotted with twinklings of Will-o-Wisps from neighboring
shores. Dusky leopards, stealing on by crouches, those vapors seemed.

Hours silently passed. When startled by a cry, Taji sprang to his feet;
against which something rattled; then, a quick splash! and a dark form
bounded into the lagoon.

The dozing watcher had called aloud; and, about to stab, the assassin,
dropping his stiletto, plunged.

Peering hard through those treacherous mists, two figures in a shallop,
were espied; dragging another, dripping, from the brine.

“Foiled again, and foiled forever. No foe’s corpse was I.”

As we gazed, in the gloom quickly vanished the shallop; ere ours could
be reversed to pursue.

Then, from the opposite mists, glided a second canoe; and beneath the
Iris round the moon, shone now another:—Hautia’s flowery flag!

Vain to wave the sirens off; so still they came.

One waved a plant of sickly silver-green.

“The Midnight Tremmella!” cried Yoomy; “the falling-star of flowers!—
Still I come, when least foreseen; then flee.”

The second waved a hemlock top, the spike just tapering its final
point. The third, a convolvulus, half closed. “The end draws nigh, and
all thy hopes are waning.” Then they proffered grapes.

But once more waved off, silently they vanished.

Again the buried barb tore, at my soul; again Yillah was invoked, but
Hautia made reply.

Slowly wore out the night. But when uprose the sun, fled clouds, and
fled sadness.




CHAPTER LXX.
They Land At Hooloomooloo


“Keep all three prows, for yonder rock.” cried Media; “No sadness on
this merry morn! And now for the Isle of Cripples,—even Hooloomooloo.”

“The Isle of Cripples?”

“Ay; why not? Mohi, tell how they came to club.” In substance, this was
the narration.

Averse to the barbarous custom of destroying at birth all infants not
symmetrically formed; but equally desirous of removing from their sight
those unfortunate beings; the islanders of a neighboring group had long
ago established an asylum for cripples; where they lived, subject to
their own regulations; ruled by a king of their own election; in short,
forming a distinct class of beings by themselves.

One only restriction was placed upon them: on no account must they quit
the isle assigned them. And to the surrounding islanders, so unpleasant
the sight of a distorted mortal, that a stranger landing at
Hooloomooloo, was deemed a prodigy. Wherefore, respecting any knowledge
of aught beyond them, the cripples were well nigh as isolated, as if
Hooloomooloo was the only terra-firma extant.

Dwelling in a community of their own, these unfortunates, who otherwise
had remained few in number, increased and multiplied greatly. Nor did
successive generations improve in symmetry upon those preceding them.

Soon, we drew nigh to the isle.

Heaped up, and jagged with rocks; and, here and there, covered with
dwarfed, twisted thickets, it seemed a fit place for its denizens.

Landing, we were surrounded by a heterogeneous mob; and thus escorted,
took our way inland, toward the abode of their lord, King Yoky.

What a scene!

Here, helping himself along with two crotched roots, hobbled a dwarf
without legs; another stalked before, one arm fixed in the air, like a
lightning rod; a third, more active than any, seal-like, flirted a pair
of flippers, and went skipping along; a fourth hopped on a solitary
pin, at every bound, spinning round like a top, to gaze; while still
another, furnished with feelers or fins, rolled himself up in a ball,
bowling over the ground in advance.

With curious instinct, the blind stuck close to our side; with their
chattering finger, the deaf and the dumb described angles, obtuse and
acute in the air; and like stones rolling down rocky ravines, scores of
stammerers stuttered. Discord wedded deformity. All asses’ brays were
now harmonious memories; all Calibans, as angels.

Yet for every stare we gave them, three stares they gave us.

At last, we halted before a tenement of rude stones; crooked Banian
boughs its rafters, thatched with fantastic leaves. So rambling and
irregular its plan, it seemed thrown up by the eruption, according to
sage Mohi, the origin of the isle itself.

Entering, we saw King Yoky.

Ah! sadly lacking was he, in all the requisites of an efficient ruler.
Deaf and dumb he was; and save arms, minus every thing but an
indispensable trunk and head. So huge his all-comprehensive mouth, it
seemed to swallow up itself.

But shapeless, helpless as was Yoky,—as king of Hooloomooloo, he was
competent; the state being a limited monarchy, of which his Highness
was but the passive and ornamental head.

As his visitors advanced, he fell to gossiping with his fingers: a
servitor interpreting. Very curious to note the rapidity with which
motion was translated into sound; and the simultaneousness with which
meaning made its way through four successive channels to the mind—hand,
sight, voice, and tympanum.

Much amazement His Highness now expressed; horrified his glances.

“Why club such frights as ye? Herd ye, to keep in countenance; or are
afraid of your own hideousness, that ye dread to go alone? Monsters!
speak.”

“Great Oro!” cried Mohi, “are we then taken for cripples, by the very
King of the Cripples? My lord, are not our legs and arms all right?”

“Comelier ones were never turned by turners, Mohi. But royal Yoky! in
sooth we feel abashed before thee.”

Some further stares were then exchanged; when His Highness sought to
know, whether there were any Comparative Anatomists among his visitors.

“Comparative Anatomists! not one.”

“And why may King Yoky ask that question?” inquired Babbalanja.

Then was made the following statement.

During the latter part of his reign, when he seemed fallen into his
dotage, the venerable predecessor of King Yoky had been much attached
to an old gray-headed Chimpanzee, one day found meditating in the
woods. Rozoko was his name. He was very grave, and reverend of aspect;
much of a philosopher. To him, all gnarled and knotty subjects were
familiar; in his day he had cracked many a crabbed nut. And so in love
with his Timonean solitude was Rozoko, that it needed many bribes and
bland persuasions, to induce him to desert his mossy, hillside,
misanthropic cave, for the distracting tumult of a court.

But ere long, promoted to high offices, and made the royal favorite,
the woodland sage forgot his forests; and, love for love, returned the
aged king’s caresses. Ardent friends they straight became; dined and
drank together; with quivering lips, quaffed long-drawn, sober bumpers;
comparing all their past experiences; and canvassing those hidden
themes, on which octogenarians dilate.

For when the fires and broils of youth are passed, and Mardi wears its
truer aspect—then we love to think, not act; the present seems more
unsubstantial than the past; then, we seek out gray-beards like
ourselves; and hold discourse of palsies, hearses, shrouds, and tombs;
appoint our undertakers; our mantles gather round us, like to
winding-sheets; and every night lie down to die. Then, the world’s
great bubble bursts; then, Life’s clouds seem sweeping by, revealing
heaven to our straining eyes; then, we tell our beads, and murmur
pater-nosters; and in trembling accents cry—“Oro! be merciful.”

So, the monarch and Rozoko.

But not always were they thus. Of bright, cheerful mornings, they took
slow, tottering rambles in the woods; nodding over grotesque walking-
sticks, of the Chimpanzee’s handiwork. For sedate Rozoko was a
dilletante-arborist: an amateur in canes. Indeed, canes at last became
his hobby. For half daft with age, sometimes he straddled his good
staff and gently rode abroad, to take the salubrious evening air;
deeming it more befitting exercise, at times, than walking. Into this
menage, he soon initiated his friend, the king; and side by side they
often pranced; or, wearying of the saddle, dismounted; and paused to
ponder over prostrate palms, decaying across the path. Their mystic
rings they counted; and, for every ring, a year in their own calendars.

Now, so closely did the monarch cleave to the Chimpanzee, that, in good
time, summoning his subjects, earnestly he charged it on them, that at
death, he and his faithful friend should be buried in one tomb.

It came to pass, the monarch died; and Poor Rozoko, now reduced to
second childhood, wailed most dismally:—no one slept that night in
Hooloomooloo. Never did he leave the body; and at last, slowly going
round it thrice, he laid him down; close nestled; and noiselessly
expired.

The king’s injunctions were remembered; and one vault received them
both.

Moon followed moon; and wrought upon by jeers and taunts, the people of
the isle became greatly scandalized, that a base-born baboon should
share the shroud of their departed lord; though they themselves had
tucked in the aged AEneas fast by the side of his Achates.

They straight resolved, to build another vault; and over it, a lofty
cairn; and thither carry the remains they reverenced.

But at the disinterring, a sad perplexity arose. For lo surpassing Saul
and Jonathan, not even in decay were these fast friends divided. So
mingled every relic,—ilium and ulna, carpus and metacarpus;—and so
similar the corresponding parts, that like the literary remains of
Beaumont and of Fletcher, which was which, no spectacles could tell.
Therefore, they desisted; lest the towering monument they had reared,
might commemorate an ape, and not a king.

Such the narration; hearing which, my lord Media kept stately silence.
But in courtly phrase, as beseemed him, Babbalanja, turban in hand,
thus spoke:—

“My concern is extreme, King Yoky, at the embarrassment into which your
island is thrown. Nor less my grief, that I myself am not the man, to
put an end to it. I could weep that Comparative Anatomists are not so
numerous now, as hereafter they assuredly must become; when their
services shall be in greater request; when, at the last, last day of
all, millions of noble and ignoble spirits will loudly clamor for lost
skeletons; when contending claimants shall start up for one poor,
carious spine; and, dog-like, we shall quarrel over our own bones.”

Then entered dwarf-stewards, and major-domos; aloft bearing twisted
antlers; all hollowed out in goblets, grouped; announcing dinner.

Loving not, however, to dine with misshapen Mardians, King Media was
loth to move. But Babbalanja, quoting the old proverb—“Strike me in the
face, but refuse not my yams,” induced him to sacrifice his
fastidiousness.

So, under a flourish of ram-horn bugles, court and company proceeded to
the banquet.

Central was a long, dislocated trunk of a wild Banian; like a huge
centipede crawling on its hundred branches, sawn of even lengths for
legs. This table was set out with wry-necked gourds; deformities of
calabashes; and shapeless trenchers, dug out of knotty woods.

The first course was shrimp-soup, served in great clampshells; the
second, lobsters, cuttle-fish, crabs, cockles, cray-fish; the third,
hunchbacked roots of the Taro-plant—plantains, perversely curling at
the end, like the inveterate tails of pertinacious pigs; and for
dessert, ill-shaped melons, huge as idiots’ heads, plainly suffering
from water in the brain.

Now these viands were commended to the favorable notice of all guests;
not only for their delicacy of flavor, but for their symmetry.

And in the intervals of the courses, we were bored with hints to admire
numerous objects of vertu: bow-legged stools of mangrove wood; zig-zag
rapiers of bone; armlets of grampus-vertebrae; outlandish tureens of
the callipees of terrapin; and cannakins of the skulls of baboons.

The banquet over, with many congees, we withdrew.

Returning to the water-side, we passed a field, where dwarfs were
laboring in beds of yams, heaping the soil around the roots, by
scratching it backward; as a dog.

All things in readiness, Yoky’s valet, a tri-armed dwarf, treated us to
a glorious start, by giving each canoe a vigorous triple-push, crying,
“away with ye, monsters!”

Nor must it be omitted that just previous to embarking, Vee-Vee, spying
a curious looking stone, turned it over, and found a snake.




CHAPTER LXXI.
A Book From The “Ponderings Of Old Bardianna”


“Now,” said Babbalanja, lighting his trombone as we sailed from the
isle, “who are the monsters, we or the cripples?”

“You yourself are a monster, for asking the question,” said Mohi.

“And so, to the cripples I am; though not, old man, for the reason you
mention. But I am, as I am; whether hideous, or handsome, depends upon
who is made judge. There is no supreme standard yet revealed, whereby
to judge of ourselves; ‘Our very instincts are prejudices,’ saith Alla
Mallolla; ‘Our very axioms, and postulates are far from infallible.’
‘In respect of the universe, mankind is but a sect,’ saith Diloro: ‘and
first principles but dogmas.’ What ethics prevail in the Pleiades? What
things have the synods in Sagittarius decreed?”

“Never mind your old authors,” said Media. “Stick to the cripples;
enlarge upon them.”

“But I have done with them now, my lord; the sermon is not the text.
Give ear to old Bardianna. I know him by heart. Thus saith the sage in
Book X. of the Ponderings, ‘Zermalmende,’ the title: ‘Je pense,’ the
motto:—‘My supremacy over creation, boasteth man, is declared in my
natural attitude:—I stand erect! But so do the palm-trees; and the
giraffes that graze off their tops. And the fowls of the air fly high
over our heads; and from the place where we fancy our heaven to be,
defile the tops of our temples. Belike, the eagles, from their eyries
look down upon us Mardians, in our hives, even as upon the beavers in
their dams, marveling at our incomprehensible ways. And cunning though
we be, some things, hidden from us, may not be mysteries to them.
Having five keys, hold we all that open to knowledge? Deaf, blind, and
deprived of the power of scent, the bat will steer its way
unerringly:—could we? Yet man is lord of the bat and the brute; lord
over the crows; with whom, he must needs share the grain he garners. We
sweat for the fowls, as well as ourselves. The curse of labor rests
only on us. Like slaves, we toil: at their good leisure they glean.

“‘Mardi is not wholly ours. We are the least populous part of creation.
To say nothing of other tribes, a census of the herring would find us
far in the minority. And what life is to us,—sour or sweet,—so is it to
them. Like us, they die, fighting death to the last; like us, they
spawn and depart. We inhabit but a crust, rough surfaces, odds and ends
of the isles; the abounding lagoon being its two-thirds, its grand
feature from afar; and forever unfathomable.

“‘What shaft has yet been sunk to the antipodes? What underlieth the
gold mines?

“‘But even here, above-ground, we grope with the sun at meridian.
Vainly, we seek our Northwest Passages,—old alleys, and thoroughfares
of the whales.

“‘Oh men! fellow men! we are only what we are; not what we would be;
nor every thing we hope for. We are but a step in a scale, that reaches
further above us than below. We breathe but oxygen. Who in Arcturus
hath heard of us? They know us not in the Milky Way. We prate of
faculties divine: and know not how sprouteth a spear of grass; we go
about shrugging our shoulders: when the firmament-arch is over us; we
rant of etherealities: and long tarry over our banquets; we demand
Eternity for a lifetime: when our mortal half-hours too often prove
tedious. We know not of what we talk. The Bird of Paradise out-flies
our flutterings. What it is to be immortal, has not yet entered into
our thoughts. At will, we build our futurities; tier above tier, all
galleries full of laureates: resounding with everlasting oratorios!
Pater-nosters forever, or eternal Misereres! forgetting that in Mardi,
our breviaries oft fall from our hands. But divans there are, some say,
whereon we shall recline, basking in effulgent suns, knowing neither
Orient nor Occident. Is it so? Fellow men! our mortal lives have an
end; but that end is no goal: no place of repose. Whatever it may be,
it will prove but as the beginning of another race. We will hope, joy,
weep, as before; though our tears may be such as the spice-trees shed.
Supine we can only be, annihilated.

“‘The thick film is breaking; the ages have long been circling.
Fellow-men! if we live hereafter, it will not be in lyrics; nor shall
we yawn, and our shadows lengthen, while the eternal cycles are
revolving. To live at all, is a high vocation; to live forever, and run
parallel with Oro, may truly appall us. Toil we not here? and shall we
be forever slothful elsewhere? Other worlds differ not much from this,
but in degree. Doubtless, a pebble is a fair specimen of the universe.

“‘We point at random. Peradventure at this instant, there are beings
gazing up to this very world as their future heaven. But the universe
is all over a heaven: nothing but stars on stars, throughout infinities
of expansion. All we see are but a cluster. Could we get to Bootes, we
would be no nearer Oro, than now he hath no place; but is here.
Already, in its unimaginable roamings, our system may have dragged us
through and through the spaces, where we plant cities of beryl and
jasper. Even now, we may be inhaling the ether, which we fancy seraphic
wings are fanning. But look round. There is much to be seen here, and
now. Do the archangels survey aught more glorious than the
constellations we nightly behold? Continually we slight the wonders, we
deem in reserve. We await the present. With marvels we are glutted,
till we hold them no marvels at all. But had these eyes first opened
upon all the prodigies in the Revelation of the Dreamer, long
familiarity would have made them appear, even as these things we see.
Now, _now_, the page is out-spread: to the simple, easy as a primer; to
the wise, more puzzling than hieroglyphics. The eternity to come, is
but a prolongation of time present: and the beginning may be more
wonderful than the end.

“‘Then let us be wise. But much of the knowledge we seek, already we
have in our cores. Yet so simple it is, we despise it; so bold, we fear
it.

“‘In solitude, let us exhume our ingots. Let us hear our own thoughts.
The soul needs no mentor, but Oro; and Oro, without proxy. Wanting Him,
it is both the teacher and the taught. Undeniably, reason was the first
revelation; and so far as it tests all others, it has precedence over
them. It comes direct to us, without suppression or interpolation; and
with Oro’s indisputable imprimatur. But inspiration though it be, it is
not so arrogant as some think. Nay, far too humble, at times it submits
to the grossest indignities. Though in its best estate, not infallible;
so far as it goes, for us, it is reliable. When at fault, it stands
still. We speak not of visionaries. But if this our first revelation
stops short of the uttermost, so with all others. If, often, it only
perplexes: much more the rest. They leave much unexpounded; and
disclosing new mysteries, add to the enigma. Fellow-men; the ocean we
would sound is unfathomable; and however much we add to our line, when
it is out, we feel not the bottom. Let us be truly lowly, then; not
lifted up with a Pharisaic humility. We crawl not like worms; nor wear
we the liveries of angels.

“‘The firmament-arch has no key-stone; least of all, is man its prop.
He stands alone. We are every thing to ourselves, but how little to
others. What are others to us? Assure life everlasting to this
generation, and their immediate forefathers—and what tears would flow,
were there no resurrection for the countless generations from the first
man to five cycles since? And soon we ourselves shall have fallen in
with the rank and file of our sires. At a blow, annihilate some distant
tribe, now alive and jocund—and what would we reck? Curiosity apart, do
we really care whether the people in Bellatrix are immortal or no?

“‘Though they smite us, let us not turn away from these things, if they
be really thus.

“‘There was a time, when near Cassiopeia, a star of the first
magnitude, most lustrous in the North, grew lurid as a fire, then dim
as ashes, and went out. Now, its place is a blank. A vast world, with
all its continents, say the astronomers, blazing over the heads of our
fathers; while in Mardi were merry-makings, and maidens given in
marriage. Who now thinks of that burning sphere? How few are aware that
ever it was?

“‘These things are so.

“‘Fellow-men! we must go, and obtain a glimpse of what we are from the
Belts of Jupiter and the Moons of Saturn, ere we see ourselves aright.
The universe can wax old without us; though by Oro’s grace we may live
to behold a wrinkle in the sky. Eternity is not ours by right; and,
alone, unrequited sufferings here, form no title thereto, unless
resurrections are reserved for maltreated brutes. Suffering is
suffering; be the sufferer man, brute, or thing.

“‘How small;—how nothing, our deserts! Let us stifle all vain
speculations; we need not to be told what righteousness is; we were
born with the whole Law in our hearts. Let us do: let us act: let us
down on our knees. And if, after all, we should be no more forever;—
far better to perish meriting immortality, than to enjoy it
unmeritorious. While we fight over creeds, ten thousand fingers point
to where vital good may be done. All round us, Want crawls to her
lairs; and, shivering, dies unrelieved. Here, _here_, fellow-men, we
can better minister as angels, than in heaven, where want and misery
come not.

“‘We Mardians talk as though the future was all in all; but act as
though the present was every thing. Yet so far as, in our theories, we
dwarf our Mardi; we go not beyond an archangel’s apprehension of it,
who takes in all suns and systems at a glance. Like pebbles, were the
isles to sink in space, Sirius, the Dog-star, would still flame in the
sky. But as the atom to the animalculae, so Mardi to us. And lived
aright, these mortal lives are long; looked into, these souls,
fathomless as the nethermost depths.

“‘Fellow-men; we split upon hairs; but stripped, mere words and phrases
cast aside, the great bulk of us are orthodox. None who think, dissent
from the grand belief. The first man’s thoughts were as ours. The
paramount revelation prevails with us; and all that clashes therewith,
we do not so much believe, as believe that we can not disbelieve.
Common sense is a sturdy despot; that, for the most part, has its own
way. It inspects and ratifies much independent of it. But those who
think they do wholly reject it, are but held in a sly sort of bondage;
under a semblance of something else, wearing the old yoke.’”

“Cease, cease, Babbalanja,” said Media, “and permit me to insinuate a
word in your ear. You have long been in the habit, philosopher, of
regaling us with chapters from your old Bardianna; and with infinite
gusto, you have just recited the longest of all. But I do not observe,
oh, Sage! that for all these things, you yourself are practically the
better or wiser. You live not up to Bardianna’s main thought. Where he
stands, he stands immovable; but you are a Dog-vane. How is this?”

“Gogle-goggle, fugle-fi, fugle-fogle-orum!”

“Mad, mad again,” cried Yoomy.




CHAPTER LXXII.
Babbalanja Starts To His Feet


For twenty-four hours, seated stiff, and motionless, Babbalanja spoke
not a word; then, almost without moving a muscle, muttered thus:—“At
banquets surfeit not, but fill; partake, and retire; and eat not again
till you crave. Thereby you give nature time to work her magic
transformings; turning all solids to meat, and wine into blood. After a
banquet you incline to repose:—do so: digestion commands. All this
follow those, who feast at the tables of Wisdom; and all such are they,
who partake of the fare of old Bardianna.”

“Art resuscitated, then, Babbalanja?” said Media. “Ay, my lord, I am
just risen from the dead.”

“And did Azzageddi conduct you to their realms?”

“Fangs off! fangs off! depart, thou fiend!—unhand me! or by Oro, I will
die and spite thee!”

“Quick, quick, Mohi! let us change places,” cried Yoomy.

“How now, Babbalanja?” said Media.

“Oh my lord man—not _you_ my lord Media!—high and mighty Puissance!
great King of Creation!—thou art but the biggest of braggarts! In every
age, thou boastest of thy valorous advances:—flat fools, old dotards,
and numskulls, our sires! All the Past, wasted time! the Present knows
all! right lucky, fellow-beings, we live now! every man an author!
books plenty as men! strike a light in a minute! teeth sold by the
pound! all the elements fetching and carrying! lightning running on
errands! rivers made to order! the ocean a puddle!— But ages back they
boasted like us; and ages to come, forever and ever, they’ll boast.
Ages back they black-balled the past, thought the last day was come; so
wise they were grown. Mardi could not stand long; have to annex one of
the planets; invade the great sun; colonize the moon;—conquerors sighed
for new Mardis; and sages for heaven— having by heart all the primers
here below. Like us, ages back they groaned under their books; made
bonfires of libraries, leaving ashes behind, mid which we reverentially
grope for charred pages, forgetting we are so much wiser than they.—But
amazing times! astounding revelations; preternatural divulgings!—How
now?—more wonderful than all our discoveries is this: that they never
were discovered before. So simple, no doubt our ancestors overlooked
them; intent on deeper things—the deep things of the soul. All we
discover has been with us since the sun began to roll; and much we
discover, is not worth the discovering. We are children, climbing trees
after birds’ nests, and making a great shout, whether we find eggs in
them or no. But where are our wings, which our fore-fathers surely had
not? Tell us, ye sages! something worth an archangel’s learning;
discover, ye discoverers, something new. Fools, fools! Mardi’s not
changed: the sun yet rises in its old place in the East; all things go
on in the same old way; we cut our eye-teeth just as late as they did,
three thousand years ago.”

“Your pardon,” said Mohi, “for beshrew me, they are not yet all cut. At
threescore and ten, here have I a new tooth coming now.”

“Old man! it but clears the way for another. The teeth sown by the
alphabet-founder, were eye-teeth, not yet all sprung from the soil.
Like spring-wheat, blade by blade, they break ground late; like
spring-wheat, many seeds have perished in the hard winter glebe. Oh, my
lord! though we galvanize corpses into St. Vitus’ dances, we raise not
the dead from their graves! Though we have discovered the circulation
of the blood, men die as of yore; oxen graze, sheep bleat, babies bawl,
asses bray—loud and lusty as the day before the flood. Men fight and
make up; repent and go at it; feast and starve; laugh and weep; pray
and curse; cheat, chaffer, trick, truckle, cozen, defraud, fib, lie,
beg, borrow, steal, hang, drown—as in the laughing and weeping,
tricking and truckling, hanging and drowning times that have been.
Nothing changes, though much be new-fashioned: new fashions but
revivals of things previous. In the books of the past we learn naught
but of the present; in those of the present, the past. All Mardi’s
history—beginning middle, and finis—was written out in capitals in the
first page penned. The whole story is told in a title- page. An
exclamation point is entire Mardi’s autobiography.”

“Who speaks now?” said Media, “Bardianna, Azzageddi, or Babbalanja?”

“All three: is it not a pleasant concert?”

“Very fine: very fine.—Go on; and tell us something of the future.”

“I have never departed this life yet, my lord.”

“But just now you said you were risen from the dead.” “From the buried
dead within me; not from myself, my lord.”

“If you, then, know nothing of the future—did Bardianna?”

“If he did, naught did he reveal. I have ever observed, my lord, that
even in their deepest lucubrations, the profoundest, frankest,
ponderers always reserve a vast deal of precious thought for their own
private behoof. They think, perhaps, that ’tis too good, or too bad;
too wise, or too foolish, for the multitude. And this unpleasant
vibration is ever consequent upon striking a new vein of ideas in the
soul. As with buried treasures, the ground over them sounds strange and
hollow. At any rate, the profoundest ponderer seldom tells us all he
thinks; seldom reveals to us the ultimate, and the innermost; seldom
makes us open our eyes under water; seldom throws open the
totus-in-toto; and never carries us with him, to the unconsubsistent,
the ideaimmanens, the super-essential, and the One.”

Confusion! Remember the Quadammodatatives!”

“Ah!” said Braid-Beard, “that’s the crack in his calabash, which all
the Dicibles of Doxdox will not mend.”

“And from that crazy calabash he gives us to drink, old Mohi.”

“But never heed his leaky gourd nor its contents, my lord. Let these
philosophers muddle themselves as they will, we wise ones refuse to
partake.”

“And fools like me drink till they reel,” said Babbalanja. “But in
these matters one’s calabash must needs go round to keep afloat.
Fogle-orum!”




CHAPTER LXXIII.
At Last, The Last Mention Is Made Of Old Bardianna; And His Last Will
And Testament Is Recited At Length


The day was waning. And, as after many a tale of ghosts, around their
forest fire, Hungarian gipsies silent sit; watching the ruddy glow
kindling each other’s faces;—so, now we solemn sat; the crimson West
our fire; all our faces flushed.

“Testators!” then cried Media, when your last wills are all round
settled, speak, and make it known!”

“Mine, my lord, has long been fixed,” said Babbalanja.

“And how runs it?”

“Fugle-fogle—”

“Hark ye, intruding Azzageddi! rejoin thy merry mates below;—go there,
and wag thy saucy tail; or I will nail it to our bow, till ye roar for
liberation. Begone, I say.”

“Down, devil! deeper down!” rumbled Babbalanja.

“My lord, I think he’s gone. And now, by your good leave, I’ll repeat
old Bardianna’s Will. It’s worth all Mardi’s hearing; and I have so
studied it, by rote I know it.”

“Proceed then; but I mistrust that Azzageddi is not yet many thousand
fathoms down.”

“Attend my lord:—‘Anno Mardis 50,000,000, o.s. I, Bardianna, of the
island of Vamba, and village of the same name, having just risen from
my yams, in high health, high spirits, and sound mind, do hereby
cheerfully make and ordain this my last will and testament.

“‘Imprimis:

“‘All my kith and kin being well to do in Mardi, I wholly leave them
out of this my will.

“‘Item. Since, in divers ways, verbally and otherwise, my good friend
Pondo has evinced a strong love for me, Bardianna, as the owner and
proprietor of all that capital messuage with the appurtenances, in
Vamba aforesaid, called ‘The Lair,’ wherein I now dwell; also for all
my Bread-fruit orchards, Palm-groves, Banana-plantations, Taro-patches,
gardens, lawns, lanes, and hereditaments whatsoever, adjoining the
aforesaid messuage;—I do hereby give and bequeath the same to Bomblum
of the island of Adda; the aforesaid Bomblum having never expressed any
regard for me, as a holder of real estate.

“‘Item. My esteemed neighbor Lakreemo having since the last lunar
eclipse called daily to inquire after the state of my health: and
having nightly made tearful inquiries of my herb-doctor, concerning the
state of my viscera;—I do hereby give and bequeath to the aforesaid
Lakreemo all and sundry those vegetable pills, potions, powders,
aperients, purgatives, expellatives, evacuatives, tonics, emetics,
cathartics, clysters, injections, scarifiers, cataplasms, lenitives,
lotions, decoctions, washes, gargles, and phlegmagogues; together with
all the jars, calabashes, gourds, and galipots, thereunto pertaining;
situate, lying, and being, in the west-by-north corner of my
east-southeast crypt, in my aforesaid tenement known as ‘The Lair.’

“‘Item. The woman Pesti; a native of Vamba, having oftentimes hinted
that I, Bardianna, sorely needed a spouse, and having also intimated
that she bore me a conjugal affection; I do hereby give and bequeath to
the aforesaid Pesti:—my blessing; forasmuch, as by the time of the
opening of this my last will and testament, I shall have been forever
delivered from the aforesaid Pesti’s persecutions.

“‘Item. Having a high opinion of the probity of my worthy and excellent
friend Bidiri, I do hereby entirely, and wholly, give, will, grant,
bestow, devise, and utterly hand over unto the said Bidiri, all that
tenement where my servant Oram now dwelleth; with all the lawns,
meadows, uplands and lowlands, fields, groves, and gardens, thereunto
belonging:—IN TRUST NEVERTHELESS to have and to hold the same for the
sole use and benefit of Lanbranka Hohinna, spinster, now resident of
the aforesaid island of Vamba.

“‘Item. I give and bequeath my large carved drinking gourd to my good
comrade Topo.

“’Item. My fast friend Doldrum having at sundry times, and in sundry
places, uttered the prophecy, that upon my decease his sorrow would be
great; I do hereby give and bequeath to the aforesaid Doldrum, ten
yards of my best soft tappa, to be divided into handkerchiefs for his
sole benefit and behoof.

“’Item. My sensible friend Solo having informed me, that he intended to
remain a bachelor for life; I give and devise to the aforesaid Solo,
the mat for one person, whereon I nightly repose.

“’Item. Concerning my private Arbor and Palm-groves, adjoining, lying,
and being in the isle of Vamba, I give and devise the same, with all
appurtenances whatsoever, to my friend Minta the Cynic, to have and to
hold, in trust for the first through-and-through honest man, issue of
my neighbor Mondi; and in default of such issue, for the first
through-and-through honest man, issue of my neighbor Pendidda; and in
default of such issue, for the first through-and-through honest man,
issue of my neighbor Wynodo: and in default of such issue, to any
through-and-through honest man, issue of any body, to be found through
the length and breadth of Mardi.

“’Item. My friend Minta the Cynic to be sole judge of all claims to the
above-mentioned devise; and to hold the said premises for his own use,
until the aforesaid person be found.

“’Item. Knowing my devoted scribe Marko to be very sensitive touching
the receipt of a favor; I willingly spare him that pain; and hereby
bequeath unto the aforesaid scribe, three milk-teeth, not as a
pecuniary legacy, but as a very slight token of my profound regard.

“’Item. I give to the poor of Vamba the total contents of my
red-labeled bags of bicuspids and canines (which I account
three-fourths of my whole estate); to my body servant Fidi, my staff,
all my robes and togas, and three hundred molars in cash; to that
discerning and sagacious philosopher my disciple Krako, one complete
set of denticles, to buy him a vertebral bone ring; and to that pious
and promising youth Vangi, two fathoms of my best kaiar rope, with the
privilege of any bough in my groves.

“’All the rest of my goods, chattels and household stuff whatsoever;
and all my loose denticles, remaining after my debts and legacies are
paid, and my body is out of sight, I hereby direct to be distributed
among the poor of Vamba.

“’Ultimo. I give and bequeath to all Mardi this my last advice and
counsel:—videlicet: live as long as you can; close your own eyes when
you die.

“’I have no previous wills to revoke; and publish this to be my first
and last.

“’In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my right hand; and hereunto
have caused a true copy of the tattooing on my right temple to be
affixed, during the year first above written.

“’By me, BARDIANNA.’”

“Babbalanja, that’s an extraordinary document,” said Media.

“Bardianna was an extraordinary man, my lord.”

“Were there no codicils?”

“The will is all codicils; all after-thoughts; Ten thoughts for one
act, was Bardianna’s motto.”

“Left he nothing whatever to his kindred?”

“Not a stump.”

“Prom his will, he seems to have lived single.”

“Yes: Bardianna never sought to improve upon nature; a bachelor he was
born, and a bachelor he died.”

“According to the best accounts, how did he depart, Babbalanja?” asked
Mohi.

“With a firm lip, and his hand on his heart, old man.”

“His last words?”

“Calmer, and better!”

“Where think you, he is now?”

“In his Ponderings. And those, my lord, we all inherit; for like the
great chief of Romara, who made a whole empire his legatee; so, great
authors have all Mardi for an heir.”




CHAPTER LXXIV.
A Death-Cloud Sweeps By Them, As They Sail


Next day, a fearful sight!

As in Sooloo’s seas, one vast water-spout will, sudden, form: and
whirling, chase the flying Malay keels; so, before a swift-winged
cloud, a thousand prows sped by, leaving braided, foaming wakes; their
crowded inmates’ arms, in frenzied supplications wreathed; like tangled
forest-boughs.

“See, see,” cried Yoomy, “how the Death-cloud flies! Let us dive down
in the sea.”

“Nay,” said Babbalanja. “All things come of Oro; if we must drown, let
Oro drown us.”

“Down sails: drop paddles,” said Media: “here we float.”

Like a rushing bison, sweeping by, the Death-cloud grazed us with its
foam; and whirling in upon the thousand prows beyond, sudden burst in
deluges; and scooping out a maelstrom, dragged down every plank and
soul.

Long we rocked upon the circling billows, which expanding from that
center, dashed every isle, till, moons after-ward, faint, they laved
all Mardi’s reef.

“Thanks unto Oro,” murmured Mohi, “this heart still beats.”

That sun-flushed eve, we sailed by many tranquil harbors, whence fled
those thousand prows. Serene, the waves ran up their strands; and
chimed around the unharmed stakes of palm, to which the thousand prows
that morning had been fastened.

“Flying death, they ran to meet it,” said Babbalanja. “But tie not that
they fled, they died; for maelstroms, of these harbors, the Death-cloud
might have made. But they died, because they might not longer live.
Could we gain one glimpse of the great calendar of eternity, all our
names would there be found, glued against their dates of death. We die
by land, and die by sea; we die by earthquakes, famines, plagues, and
wars; by fevers, agues; woe, or mirth excessive. This mortal air is one
wide pestilence, that kills us all at last. Whom the Death-cloud
spares, sleeping, dies in silent watches of the night. He whom the
spears of many battles could not slay, dies of a grape-stone, beneath
the vine-clad bower he built, to shade declining years. We die, because
we live. But none the less does Babbalanja quake. And if he flies not,
’tis because he stands the center of a circle; its every point a
leveled dart; and every bow, bent back:—a twang, and Babbalanja dies.”




CHAPTER LXXV.
They Visit The Palmy King Abrazza


Night and morn departed; and in the afternoon, we drew nigh to an
island, overcast with shadows; a shower was falling; and pining,
plaintive notes forth issued from the groves: half-suppressed, and
sobbing whisperings of leaves. The shore sloped to the water; thither
our prows were pointed.

“Sheer off! no landing here,” cried Media, “let us gain the sunny side;
and like the care-free bachelor Abrazza, who here is king, turn our
back on the isle’s shadowy side, and revel in its morning-meads.”

“And lord Abrazza:—who is he?” asked Yoomy.

“The one hundred and twentieth in lineal descent from Phipora,” said
Mohi; “and connected on the maternal side to the lord seigniors of
Klivonia. His uttermost uncle was nephew to the niece of Queen
Zmiglandi; who flourished so long since, she wedded at the first
Transit of Venus. His pedigree is endless.”

“But who is lord Abrazza?”

“Has he not said?” answered Babbalanja. “Why so dull?—Uttermost nephew
to him, who was nephew to the niece of the peerless Queen Zmiglandi;
and the one hundred and twentieth in descent from the illustrious
Phipora.”

“Will none tell, who Abrazza is?”

“Can not a man then, be described by running off the catalogue of his
ancestors?” said Babbalanja. “Or must we e’en descend to himself. Then,
listen, dull Yoomy! and know that lord Abrazza is six feet two: plump
thighs; blue eyes; and brown hair; likes his bread-fruit baked, not
roasted; sometimes carries filberts in his crown: and has a way of
winking when he speaks. His teeth are good.”

“Are you publishing some decamped burglar,” said Media, “that you speak
thus of my royal friend, the lord Abrazza? Go on, sir! and say he
reigns sole king of Bonovona!”

“My lord, I had not ended. Abrazza, Yoomy, is a fine and florid king:
high-fed, and affluent of heart; of speech, mellifluent. And for a
royalty extremely amiable. He is a sceptered gentleman, who does much
good. Kind king! in person he gives orders for relieving those, who
daily dive for pearls, to grace his royal robe; and gasping hard, with
blood-shot eyes, come up from shark-infested depths, and fainting, lay
their treasure at his feet. Sweet lord Abrazza! how he pities those,
who in his furthest woodlands day-long toil to do his bidding. Yet
king-philosopher, he never weeps; but pities with a placid smile; and
that but seldom.”

“There seems much iron in your blood,” said Media. “But say your say.”

“Say I not truth, my lord? Abrazza, I admire. Save his royal pity all
else is jocund round him. He loves to live for life’s own sake. He vows
he’ll have no cares; and often says, in pleasant reveries,— ‘Sure, my
lord Abrazza, if any one should be care-free, ’tis thou; who strike
down none, but pity all the fallen!’ Yet none he lifteth up.”

At length we gained the sunny side, and shoreward tended. Vee-Vee’s
horn was sonorous; and issuing from his golden groves, my lord Abrazza,
like a host that greets you on the threshold, met us, as we keeled the
beach.

“Welcome! fellow demi-god, and king! Media, my pleasant guest!”

His servitors salamed; his chieftains bowed; his yeoman-guard, in
meadow-green, presented palm-stalks,—royal tokens; and hand in hand,
the nodding, jovial, regal friends, went up a lane of salutations;
dragging behind, a train of envyings.

Much we marked Abrazza’s jeweled crown; that shot no honest blaze of
ruddy rubies; nor looked stern-white like Media’s pearls; but cast a
green and yellow glare; rays from emeralds, crossing rays from many a
topaz. In those beams, so sinister, all present looked cadaverous:
Abrazza’s cheek alone beamed bright, but hectic.

Upon its fragrant mats a spacious hall received the kings; and
gathering courtiers blandly bowed; and gushing with soft flatteries,
breathed idol-incense round them.

The hall was terraced thrice; its elevated end was curtained; and
thence, at every chime of words, there burst a girl, gay scarfed, with
naked bosom, and poured forth wild and hollow laughter, as she raced
down all the terraces, and passed their merry kingships.

Wide round the hall, in avenues, waved almond-woods; their whiteness
frosted into bloom. But every vine-clad trunk was hollow-hearted;
hollow sounds came from the grottos: hollow broke the billows on the
shore: and hollow pauses filled the air, following the hollow laughter.

Guards, with spears, paced the groves, and in the inner shadows, oft
were seen to lift their weapons, and backward press some ugly phantom,
saying, “Subjects! haunt him not; Abrazza would be merry; Abrazza
feasts his guests.”

So, banished from our sight seemed all things uncongenial; and pleasant
times were ours, in these dominions. Not a face passed by, but smiled;
mocking-birds perched on the boughs; and singing, made us vow the woods
were warbling forth thanksgiving, with a thousand throats! The stalwart
yeomen grinned beneath their trenchers, heaped with citrons
pomegrantes, grapes; the pages tittered, pouring out the wine; and all
the lords loud laughed, smote their gilded spears, and swore the isle
was glad.

Such the isle, in which we tarried; but in our rambles, found no
Yillah.




CHAPTER LXXVI.
Some Pleasant, Shady Talk In The Groves, Between My Lords Abrazza And
Media, Babbalanja, Mohi, And Yoomy


Abrazza had a cool retreat—a grove of dates; where we were used to
lounge of noons, and mix our converse with the babble of the rills; and
mix our punches in goblets chased with grapes. And as ever, King
Abrazza was the prince of hosts.

“Your crown,” he said to Media; and with his own, he hung it on a
bough.

“Be not ceremonious:” and stretched his royal legs upon the turf.

“Wine!” and his pages poured it out.

So on the grass we lounged; and King Abrazza, who loved his antique
ancestors; and loved old times; and would not talk of moderns;—bade
Yoomy sing old songs; bade Mohi rehearse old histories; bade Babbalanja
tell of old ontologies; and commanded all, meanwhile, to drink his old,
old wine.

So, all round we quaffed and quoted.

At last, we talked of old Homeric bards:—those who, ages back, harped,
and begged, and groped their blinded way through all this charitable
Mardi; receiving coppers then, and immortal glory now.

ABRAZZA—How came it, that they all were blind?

BABBALANJA—It was endemical, your Highness. Few grand poets have good
eyes; for they needs blind must be, who ever gaze upon the sun. Vavona
himself was blind: when, in the silence of his secret bower, he said—“I
will build another world. Therein, let there be kings and slaves,
philosophers and wits; whose checkered actions—strange, grotesque, and
merry-sad, will entertain my idle moods.” So, my lord, Vavona played at
kings and crowns, and men and manners; and loved that lonely game to
play.

ABRAZZA—Vavona seemed a solitary Mardian; who seldom went abroad; had
few friends; and shunning others, was shunned by them.

BABBALANJA—But shunned not himself, my lord; like gods, great poets
dwell alone; while round them, roll the worlds they build.

MEDIA—You seem to know all authors:—you must have heard of Lombardo,
Babbalanja; he who flourished many ages since.

BABBALANJA—I have; and his grand Kortanza know by heart.

MEDIA (_to Abrazza._)—A very curious work, that, my lord.

ABRAZZA—Yes, my dearest king. But, Babbalanja, if Lombardo had aught to
tell to Mardi—why choose a vehicle so crazy?

BABBALANJA—It was his nature, I suppose.

ABRAZZA—But so it would not have been, to me.

BABBALANJA—Nor would it have been natural, for my noble lord Abrazza,
to have worn Lombardo’s head:—every man has his own, thank Oro!

ABBRAZZA—A curious work: a very curious work. Babbalanja, are you
acquainted with the history of Lombardo?

BABBALANJA—None better. All his biographies have I read.

ABRAZZA—Then, tell us how he came to write that work. For one, I can
not imagine how those poor devils contrive to roll such thunders
through all Mardi.

MEDIA—Their thunder and lightning seem spontaneous combustibles, my
lord.

ABRAZZA—With which, they but consume themselves, my prince beloved.

BABBALANJA—In a measure, true, your Highness. But pray you, listen; and
I will try to tell the way in which Lombardo produced his great
Kortanza.

MEDIA—But hark you, philosopher! this time no incoherencies; gag that
devil, Azzageddi. And now, what was it that originally impelled
Lombardo to the undertaking?

BABBALANJA—Primus and forever, a full heart:—brimful, bubbling,
sparkling; and running over like the flagon in your hand, my lord.
Secundo, the necessity of bestirring himself to procure his yams.

ABRAZZA—Wanting the second motive, would the first have sufficed,
philosopher?

BABBALANJA—Doubtful. More conduits than one to drain off the soul’s
overflowings. Besides, the greatest fullnesses overflow not
spontaneously; and, even when decanted, like rich syrups, slowly ooze;
whereas, poor fluids glibly flow, wide-spreading. Hence, when great
fullness weds great indolence;—that man, to others, too often proves a
cipher; though, to himself, his thoughts form an Infinite Series,
indefinite, from its vastness; and incommunicable;—not for lack of
power, but for lack of an omnipotent volition, to move his strength.
His own world is full before him; the fulcrum set; but lever there is
none. To such a man, the giving of any boor’s resoluteness, with
tendons braided, would be as hanging a claymore to Valor’s side, before
unarmed. Our minds are cunning, compound mechanisms; and one spring, or
wheel, or axle wanting, the movement lags, or halts. Cerebrum must not
overbalance cerebellum; our brains should be round as globes; and
planted on capacious chests, inhaling mighty morning- inspirations. We
have had vast developments of parts of men; but none of manly wholes.
Before a full-developed man, Mardi would fall down and worship. We are
idiot, younger-sons of gods, begotten in dotages divine; and our
mothers all miscarry. Giants are in our germs; but we are dwarfs,
staggering under heads overgrown. Heaped, our measures burst. We die of
too much life.

MEDIA (_to Abrazza_)—Be not impatient, my lord; he’ll recover
presently. You were talking of Lombardo, Babbalanja.

BABBALANJA—I was, your Highness. Of all Mardians, by nature, he was the
most inert. Hast ever seen a yellow lion, all day basking in the yellow
sun:—in reveries, rending droves of elephants; but his vast loins
supine, and eyelids winking? Such, Lombardo; but fierce Want, the
hunter, came and roused his roar. In hairy billows, his great mane
tossed like the sea; his eyeballs flamed two hells; his paw had stopped
a rolling world.

ABRAZZA—In other words, yams were indispensable, and, poor devil, he
roared to get them.

BABBALANJA (_bowing_)—Partly so, my literal lord. And as with your own
golden scepter, at times upon your royal teeth, indolent tattoos you
beat; then, potent, sway it o’er your isle; so, Lombardo. And ere
Necessity plunged spur and rowel into him, he knew not his own paces.
_That_ churned him into consciousness; and brought ambition, ere then
dormant, seething to the top, till he trembled at himself. No mailed
hand lifted up against a traveler in woods, can so, appall, as we
ourselves. We are full of ghosts and spirits; we are as grave-yards
full of buried dead, that start to life before us. And all our dead
sires, verily, are in us; _that_ is their immortality. From sire to
son, we go on multiplying corpses in ourselves; for all of which, are
resurrections. Every thought’s a soul of some past poet, hero, sage. We
are fuller than a city. Woe it is, that reveals these things. He knows
himself, and all that’s in him, who knows adversity. To scale great
heights, we must come out of lowermost depths. The way to heaven is
through hell. We need fiery baptisms in the fiercest flames of our own
bosoms. We must feel our hearts hot—hissing in us. And ere their fire
is revealed, it must burn its way out of us; though it consume us and
itself. Oh, sleek-cheeked Plenty! smiling at thine own dimples;—vain
for thee to reach out after greatness. Turn! turn! from all your tiers
of cushions of eider-down—turn! and be broken on the wheels of many
woes. At white-heat, brand thyself; and count the scars, like old
war-worn veterans, over camp-fires. Soft poet! brushing tears from
lilies—this way! and howl in sackcloth and in ashes! Know, thou, that
the lines that live are turned out of a furrowed brow. Oh! there is a
fierce, a cannibal delight, in the grief that shrieks to multiply
itself. That grief is miserly of its own; it pities all the happy. Some
damned spirits would not be otherwise, could they.

ABRAZZA (_to Media_)—Pray, my lord, is this good gentleman a devil?

MEDIA.—No, my lord; but he’s possessed by one. His name is Azzageddi.
You may hear more of him. But come, Babbalanja, hast forgotten all
about Lombardo? How set he about that great undertaking, his Kortanza?

ABRAZZA (_to Media_)—Oh, for all the ravings of your Babbalanja,
Lombardo took no special pains; hence, deserves small commendation.
For, genius must be somewhat like us kings,—calm, content, in
consciousness of power. And to Lombardo, the scheme of his Kortanza
must have come full-fledged, like an eagle from the sun.

BABBALANJA—No, your Highness; but like eagles, his thoughts were first
callow; yet, born plumeless, they came to soar.

ABRAZZA—Very fine. I presume, Babbalanja, the first thing he did, was
to fast, and invoke the muses.

BABBALANJA—Pardon, my lord; on the contrary he first procured a ream of
vellum, and some sturdy quills: indispensable preliminaries, my
worshipful lords, to the writing of the sublimest epics.

ABRAZZA—Ah! then the muses were afterward invoked.

BABBALANJA—Pardon again. Lombardo next sat down to a fine plantain
pudding.

YOOMY—When the song-spell steals over me, I live upon olives.

BABBALANJA—Yoomy, Lombardo eschewed olives. Said he, “What fasting
soldier can fight? and the fight of all fights is to write.” In ten
days Lombardo had written—

ABRAZZA—Dashed off, you mean.

BABBALANJA—He never dashed off aught.

ABRAZZA—As you will.

BABBALANJA—In ten days, Lombardo had written full fifty folios; he
loved huge acres of vellum whereon to expatiate.

MEDIA—What then?

BABBALANJA—He read them over attentively; made a neat package of the
whole: and put it into the fire.

ALL—How?

MEDIA—What! these great geniuses writing trash?

ABRAZZA—I thought as much.

BABBALANJA—My lords, they abound in it! more than any other men in
Mardi. Genius is full of trash. But genius essays its best to keep it
to itself; and giving away its ore, retains the earth; whence, the too
frequent wisdom of its works, and folly of its life.

ABRAZZA—Then genius is not inspired, after all. How they must slave in
their mines! I weep to think of it.

BABBALANJA—My lord, all men are inspired; fools are inspired; your
highness is inspired; for the essence of all ideas is infused. Of
ourselves, and in ourselves, we originate nothing. When Lombardo set
about his work, he knew not what it would become. He did not build
himself in with plans; he wrote right on; and so doing, got deeper and
deeper into himself; and like a resolute traveler, plunging through
baffling woods, at last was rewarded for his toils. “In good time,”
saith he, in his autobiography, “I came out into a serene, sunny,
ravishing region; full of sweet scents, singing birds, wild plaints,
roguish laughs, prophetic voices. “Here we are at last, then,” he
cried; “I have created the creative.” And now the whole boundless
landscape stretched away. Lombardo panted; the sweat was on his brow;
he off mantle; braced himself; sat within view of the ocean; his face
to a cool rushing breeze; placed flowers before him; and gave himself
plenty of room. On one side was his ream of vellum—

ABBRAZZA—And on the other, a brimmed beaker.

BABBALANJA—No, your Highness; though he loved it, no wine for Lombardo
while actually at work.

MOHI—Indeed? Why, I ever thought that it was to the superior quality of
Lombardo’s punches, that Mardi was indebted for that abounding humor of
his.

BABBALANJA—Not so; he had another way of keeping himself well braced.

YOOMY—Quick! tell us the secret.

BABBALANJA—He never wrote by rush-light. His lamp swung in heaven.— He
rose from his East, with the sun; he wrote when all nature was alive.

MOHI—Doubtless, then, he always wrote with a grin; and none laughed
louder at his quips, than Lombardo himself.

BABBALANJA—Hear you laughter at the birth of a man child, old man? The
babe may have many dimples; not so, the parent. Lombardo was a hermit
to behold.

MEDIA—What! did Lombardo laugh with a long face?

BABBALANJA—His merriment was not always merriment to him, your
Highness. For the most part, his meaning kept him serious. Then he was
so intensely riveted to his work, he could not pause to laugh.

MOHI—My word for it; but he had a sly one, now and then.

BABBALANJA—For the nonce, he was not his own master: a mere amanuensis
writing by dictation.

YOOMY—Inspiration, that!

BABBALANJA.—Call it as you will, Yoomy, it was a sort of sleep- walking
of the mind. Lombardo never threw down his pen: it dropped from him;
and then, he sat disenchanted: rubbing his eyes; staring; and feeling
faint—sometimes, almost unto death.

MEDIA—But pray, Babbalanja, tell us how he made acquaintance with some
of those rare worthies, he introduces us to, in his Koztanza.

BABBALANJA—He first met them in his reveries; they were walking about
in him, sour and moody: and for a long time, were shy of his advances;
but still importuned, they at last grew ashamed of their reserve;
stepped forward; and gave him their hands. After that, they were frank
and friendly. Lombardo set places for them at his board; when he died,
he left them something in his will.

MEDIA—What! those imaginary beings?

ABRAZZA—Wondrous witty! infernal fine!

MEDIA—But, Babbalanja; after all, the Koztanza found no favor in the
eyes of some Mardians.

ABRAZZA—Ay: the arch-critics Verbi and Batho denounced it.

BABBALANJA—Yes: on good authority, Verbi is said to have detected a
superfluous comma; and Batho declared that, with the materials he could
have constructed a far better world than Lombardo’s. But, didst ever
hear of his laying his axis?

ABRAZZA—But the unities; Babbalanja, the unities! they are wholly
wanting in the Koztanza.

BABBALANJA—Your Highness; upon that point, Lombardo was frank. Saith
he, in his autobiography: “For some time, I endeavored to keep in the
good graces of those nymphs; but I found them so captious, and
exacting; they threw me into such a violent passion with their
fault-findings; that, at last, I renounced them.”

ABRAZZA—Very rash!

BABBALANJA—No, your Highness; for though Lombardo abandoned all
monitors from without; he retained one autocrat within—his crowned and
sceptered instinct. And what, if he pulled down one gross world, and
ransacked the etherial spheres, to build up something of his own—a
composite:—what then? matter and mind, though matching not, are mates;
and sundered oft, in his Koztanza they unite:—the airy waist, embraced
by stalwart arms.

MEDIA—Incoherent again! I thought we were to have no more of this!

BABBALANJA—My lord Media, there are things infinite in the finite; and
dualities in unities. Our eyes are pleased with the redness of the
rose, but another sense lives upon its fragrance. Its redness you must
approach, to view: its invisible fragrance pervades the field. So, with
the Koztanza. Its mere beauty is restricted to its form: its expanding
soul, past Mardi does embalm. Modak is Modako; but fogle-foggle is not
fugle-fi.

MEDIA (_to Abrazza_)—My lord, you start again; but ’tis only another
phase of Azzageeddi; sometimes he’s quite mad. But all this you must
needs overlook.

ABRAZZA—I will, my dear prince; what one can not see through, one must
needs look over, as you say.

YOOMY—But trust me, your Highness, some of those strange things fall
far too melodiously upon the ear, to be wholly deficient in meaning.

ABRAZZA—Your gentle minstrel, _this_ must be, my lord. But Babbalanja,
the Koztanza lacks cohesion; it is wild, unconnected, all episode.

BABBALANJA—And so is Mardi itself:—nothing but episodes; valleys and
hills; rivers, digressing from plains; vines, roving all over; boulders
and diamonds; flowers and thistles; forests and thickets; and, here and
there, fens and moors. And so, the world in the Koztanza.

ABRAZZA—Ay, plenty of dead-desert chapters there; horrible sands to
wade through.

MEDIA—Now, Babbalanja, away with your tropes; and tell us of the work,
directly it was done. What did Lombardo then? Did he show it to any one
for an opinion?

BABBALANJA—Yes, to Zenzori; who asked him where he picked up so much
trash; to Hanto, who bade him not be cast down, it was pretty good; to
Lucree, who desired to know how much he was going to get for it; to
Roddi, who offered a suggestion.

MEDIA—And what was that?

BABBALANJA—That he had best make a faggot of the whole; and try again.

ABRAZZA—Very encouraging.

MEDIA—Any one else?

BABBALANJA—To Pollo; who, conscious his opinion was sought, was thereby
puffed up; and marking the faltering of Lombardo’s voice, when the
manuscript was handed him, straightway concluded, that the man who
stood thus trembling at the bar, must needs be inferior to the judge.
But his verdict was mild. After sitting up all night over the work; and
diligently taking notes:—“Lombardo, my friend! here, take your sheets.
I have run through them loosely. You might have done better; but then
you might have done worse. Take them, my friend; I have put in some
good things for you:”

MEDIA—And who was Pollo?

BABBALANJA—Probably some one who lived in Lombardo’s time, and went by
that name. He is incidentally mentioned, and cursorily immortalized in
one of the posthumous notes to the Koztanza.

MEDIA—What is said of him there?

BABBALANJA—Not much. In a very old transcript of the work—that of
Aldina—the note alludes to a brave line in the text, and runs thus:—
“Diverting to tell, it was this passage that an old prosodist, one
Pollo, claimed for his own. He maintained he made a free-will offering
of it to Lombardo. Several things are yet extant of this Pollo, who
died some weeks ago. He seems to have been one of those, who would do
great things if they could; but are content to compass the small. He
imagined, that the precedence of authors he had established in his
library, was their Mardi order of merit. He condemned the sublime poems
of Vavona to his lowermost shelf. ‘Ah,’ thought he, ‘how we library
princes, lord it over these beggarly authors!’ Well read in the history
of their woes, Pollo pitied them all, particularly the famous; and
wrote little essays of his own, which he read to himself.”

MEDIA—Well: and what said Lombardo to those good friends of his,—
Zenzori, Hanto, and Roddi?

BABBALANJA—Nothing. Taking home his manuscript, he glanced it over;
making three corrections.

ABRAZZA—And what then?

BABBALANJA—Then, your Highness, he thought to try a conclave of
professional critics; saying to himself, “Let them privately point out
to me, now, all my blemishes; so that, what time they come to review me
in public, all will be well.” But curious to relate, those professional
critics, for the most part, held their peace, concerning a work yet
unpublished. And, with some generous exceptions, in their vague,
learned way, betrayed such base, beggarly notions of authorship, that
Lombardo could have wept, had tears been his. But in his very grief, he
ground his teeth. Muttered he, “They are fools. In their eyes, bindings
not brains make books. They criticise my tattered cloak, not my soul,
caparisoned like a charger. He is the great author, think they, who
drives the best bargain with his wares: and no bargainer am I. Because
he is old, they worship some mediocrity of an ancient, and mock at the
living prophet with the live coal on his lips. They are men who would
not be men, had they no books. Their sires begat them not; but the
authors they have read. Feelings they have none: and their very
opinions they borrow. They can not say yea, nor nay, without first
consulting all Mardi as an Encyclopedia. And all the learning in them,
is as a dead corpse in a coffin. Were they worthy the dignity of being
damned, I would damn them; but they are not. Critics?—Asses! rather
mules!—so emasculated, from vanity, they can not father a true thought.
Like mules, too, from dunghills, they trample down gardens of roses:
and deem that crushed fragrance their own.—Oh! that all round the
domains of genius should lie thus unhedged, for such cattle to uproot!
Oh! that an eagle should be stabbed by a goose-quill! But at best, the
greatest reviewers but prey on my leavings. For I am critic and
creator; and as critic, in cruelty surpass all critics merely, as a
tiger, jackals. For ere Mardi sees aught of mine, I scrutinize it
myself, remorseless as a surgeon. I cut right and left; I probe, tear,
and wrench; kill, burn, and destroy; and what’s left after that, the
jackals are welcome to. It is I that stab false thoughts, ere hatched;
I that pull down wall and tower, rejecting materials which would make
palaces for others. Oh! could Mardi but see how we work, it would
marvel more at our primal chaos, than at the round world thence
emerging. It would marvel at our scaffoldings, scaling heaven; marvel
at the hills of earth, banked all round our fabrics ere completed.—How
plain the pyramid! In this grand silence, so intense, pierced by that
pointed mass,—could ten thousand slaves have ever toiled? ten thousand
hammers rung?—There it stands, —part of Mardi: claiming kin with
mountains;—was this thing piecemeal built?—It was. Piecemeal?—atom by
atom it was laid. The world is made of mites.”

YOOMY (_musing._)—It is even so.

ABRAZZA—Lombardo was severe upon the critics; and they as much so upon
him;—of that, be sure.

BABBALANGA—Your Highness, Lombardo never presumed to criticise true
critics; who are more rare than true poets. A great critic is a sultan
among satraps; but pretenders are thick as ants, striving to scale a
palm, after its aerial sweetness. And they fight among themselves.
Essaying to pluck eagles, they themselves are geese, stuck full of
quills, of which they rob each other.

ABRAZZA (_to Media._)—Oro help the victim that falls in Babbalanja’s
hands!

MEDIA.—Ay, my lord; at times, his every finger is a dagger: every
thought a falling tower that whelms! But resume, philosopher—what of
Lombardo now?

BABBALANJA—“For this thing,” said he, “I have agonized over it
enough.—I can wait no more. It has faults—all mine;—its merits all its
own;—but I can toil no longer. The beings knit to me implore; my heart
is full; my brain is sick. Let it go—let it go—and Oro with it.
Somewhere Mardi has a mighty heart—-_that_ struck, all the isles shall
resound!”

ABRAZZA—Poor devil! he took the world too hard.

MEDIA.-As most of these mortals do, my lord. That’s the load, self-
imposed, under which Babbalanja reels. But now, philosopher, ere Mardi
saw it, what thought Lombardo of his work, looking at it objectively,
as a thing out of him, I mean.

ABRAZZA—No doubt, he hugged it.

BABBALANJA—Hard to answer. Sometimes, when by himself, he thought
hugely of it, as my lord Abrazza says; but when abroad, among men, he
almost despised it; but when he bethought him of those parts, written
with full eyes, half blinded; temples throbbing; and pain at the heart—

ABRAZZA—Pooh! pooh!

BABBALANJA—He would say to himself, “Sure, it can not be in vain!” Yet
again, when he bethought him of the hurry and bustle of Mardi,
dejection stole over him. “Who will heed it,” thought he; “what care
these fops and brawlers for me? But am I not myself an egregious
coxcomb? Who will read me? Say one thousand pages—twenty-five lines
each—every line ten words—every word ten letters. That’s two million
five hundred thousand _a_’s, and _i_’s, and _o_’s to read! How many are
superfluous? Am I not mad to saddle Mardi with such a task? Of all men,
am I the wisest, to stand upon a pedestal, and teach the mob? Ah, my
own Kortanza! child of many prayers!—in whose earnest eyes, so
fathomless, I see my own; and recall all past delights and silent
agonies-thou may’st prove, as the child of some fond dotard:— beauteous
to me; hideous to Mardi! And methinks, that while so much slaving
merits that thou should’st not die; it has not been intense, prolonged
enough, for the high meed of immortality. Yet, things immortal have
been written; and by men as me;—men, who slept and waked; and ate; and
talked with tongues like mine. Ah, Oro! how may we know or not, we are
what we would be? Hath genius any stamp and imprint, obvious to
possessors? Has it eyes to see itself; or is it blind? Or do we delude
ourselves with being gods, and end in grubs? Genius, genius?—a thousand
years hence, to be a household-word?—I?— Lombardo? but yesterday cut in
the market-place by a spangled fool!— Lombardo immortal?—Ha, ha,
Lombardo! but thou art an ass, with vast ears brushing the tops of
palms! Ha, ha, ha! Methinks I see thee immortal! ‘Thus great Lombardo
saith; and thus; and thus; and thus:— thus saith he—illustrious
Lombardo!—Lombardo, our great countryman! Lombardo, prince of
poets—Lombardo! great Lombardo!’—Ha, ha, ha!— go, go! dig thy grave,
and bury thyself!”

ABRAZZA—He was very funny, then, at times.

BABBALANJA—Very funny, your Highness:—amazing jolly! And from my
nethermost soul, would to Oro, thou could’st but feel one touch of that
jolly woe! It would appall thee, my Right Worshipful lord Abrazza!

ABRAZZA (_to Media_)—My dear lord, his teeth are marvelously white and
sharp: some she-shark must have been his dam:—does he often grin thus?
It was infernal!

MEDIA—Ah! that’s Azzageddi. But, prithee, Babbalanja, proceed.

BABBALANJA—Your Highness, even in his calmer critic moods, Lombardo was
far from fancying his work. He confesses, that it ever seemed to him
but a poor scrawled copy of something within, which, do what he would,
he could not completely transfer. “My canvas was small,” said he;
“crowded out were hosts of things that came last. But Fate is in it.”
And Fate it was, too, your Highness, which forced Lombardo, ere his
work was well done, to take it off his easel, and send it to be
multiplied. “Oh, that I was not thus spurred!” cried he; “but like many
another, in its very childhood, this poor child of mine must go out
into Mardi, and get bread for its sire.”

ABRAZZA (_with a sigh_)—Alas, the poor devil! But methinks ’twas
wondrous arrogant in him to talk to all Mardi at that lofty rate.—Did
he think himself a god?

BABBALANJA—He himself best knew what he thought; but, like all others,
he was created by Oro to some special end; doubtless, partly answered
in his Koztanza.

MEDIA—And now that Lombardo is long dead and gone—and his work, hooted
during life, lives after him—what think the present company of it?
Speak, my lord Abrazza! Babbalanja! Mohi! Yoomy!

ABRAZZA (_tapping his sandal with his scepter__)—I never read it.

BABBALANJA (_looking upward_)—It was written with a divine intent.

Mohi (_stroking his beard_)—I never hugged it in a corner, and ignored
it before Mardi.

Yoomy (_musing_)—It has bettered my heart.

MEDIA (_rising_)—And I have read it through nine times.

BABBALANJA (_starting up_)—Ah, Lombardo! this must make thy ghost glad!




CHAPTER LXXVII.
They Sup


There seemed something sinister, hollow, heartless, about Abrazza, and
that green-and-yellow, evil-starred crown that he wore.

But why think of that? Though we like not something in the curve of
one’s brow, or distrust the tone of his voice; yet, let us away with
suspicions if we may, and make a jolly comrade of him, in the name of
the gods. Miserable! thrice miserable he, who is forever turning over
and over one’s character in his mind, and weighing by nice avoirdupois,
the pros and the cons of his goodness and badness. For we are all good
and bad. Give me the heart that’s huge as all Asia; and unless a man,
be a villain outright, account him one of the best tempered blades in
the world.

That night, in his right regal hall, King Abrazza received us. And in
merry good time a fine supper was spread.

Now, in thus nocturnally regaling us, our host was warranted by many
ancient and illustrious examples.

For old Jove gave suppers; the god Woden gave suppers; the Hindoo deity
Brahma gave suppers; the Red Man’s Great Spirit gave suppers:— chiefly
venison and game.

And many distinguished mortals besides.

Ahasuerus gave suppers; Xerxes gave suppers; Montezuma gave suppers;
Powhattan gave suppers; the Jews’ Passovers were suppers; the Pharaohs
gave suppers; Julius Caesar gave suppers:—and rare ones they were;
Great Pompey gave suppers; Nabob Crassus gave suppers; and
Heliogabalus, surnamed the Gobbler, gave suppers.

It was a common saying of old, that King Pluto gave suppers; some say
he is giving them still. If so, he is keeping tip-top company, old
Pluto:—Emperors and Czars; Great Moguls and Great Khans; Grand Lamas
and Grand Dukes; Prince Regents and Queen Dowagers:—Tamerlane
hob-a-nobbing with Bonaparte; Antiochus with Solyman the Magnificent;
Pisistratus pledging Pilate; Semiramis eating bon-bons with Bloody
Mary, and her namesake of Medicis; the Thirty Tyrants quaffing three to
one with the Council of Ten; and Sultans, Satraps, Viziers, Hetmans,
Soldans, Landgraves, Bashaws, Doges, Dauphins, Infantas, Incas, and
Caciques looking on.

Again: at Arbela, the conqueror of conquerors, conquering son of
Olympia by Jupiter himself, sent out cards to his captains,—
Hephestion, Antigonus, Antipater, and the rest—to join him at ten,
p.m., in the Temple of Belus; there, to sit down to a victorious
supper, off the gold plate of the Assyrian High Priests. How
majestically he poured out his old Madeira that night!—feeling grand
and lofty as the Himmalehs; yea, all Babylon nodded her towers in his
soul!

Spread, heaped up, stacked with good things; and redolent of citrons
and grapes, hilling round tall vases of wine; and here and there,
waving with fresh orange-boughs, among whose leaves, myriads of small
tapers gleamed like fire-flies in groves,—Abrazza’s glorious board
showed like some banquet in Paradise: Ceres and Pomona presiding; and
jolly Bacchus, like a recruit with a mettlesome rifle, staggering back
as he fires off the bottles of vivacious champagne.

In ranges, roundabout stood living candelabras:—lackeys, gayly
bedecked, with tall torches in their hands; and at one end, stood
trumpeters, bugles at their lips.

“This way, my dear Media!—this seat at my left—Noble Taji!—my right.
Babbalanja!—Mohi—where you are. But where’s pretty Yoomy?— Gone to
meditate in the moonlight? ah!—Very good. Let the banquet begin. A
blast there!”

And charge all did.

The venison, wild boar’s meat, and buffalo-humps, were extraordinary;
the wine, of rare vintages, like bottled lightning; and the first
course, a brilliant affair, went off like a rocket.

But as yet, Babbalanja joined not in the revels. His mood was on him;
and apart he sat; silently eyeing the banquet; and ever and anon
muttering,—“Fogle-foggle, fugle-fi.—”

The first fury of the feast over, said King Media, pouring out from a
heavy flagon into his goblet, “Abrazza, these suppers are wondrous fine
things.”

“Ay, my dear lord, much better than dinners.”

“So they are, so they are. The dinner-hour is the summer of the day:
full of sunshine, I grant; but not like the mellow autumn of supper. A
dinner, you know, may go off rather stiffly; but invariably suppers are
jovial. At dinners, ’tis not till you take in sail, furl the cloth, bow
the lady-passengers out, and make all snug; ’tis not till then, that
one begins to ride out the gale with complacency. But at these
suppers—Good Oro! your cup is empty, my dear demi-god!—But at these
suppers, I say, all is snug and ship-shape before you begin; and when
you begin, you waive the beginning, and begin in the middle. And as for
the cloth,—but tell us, Braid-Beard, what that old king of Franko,
Ludwig the Fat, said of that matter. The cloth for suppers, you know.
It’s down in your chronicles.”

“My lord,”—wiping his beard,—“Old Ludwig was of opinion, that at
suppers the cloth was superfluous, unless on the back of some jolly
good friar. Said he, ‘For one, I prefer sitting right down to the
unrobed table.’”

“High and royal authority, that of Ludwig the Fat,” said Babbalanja,
“far higher than the authority of Ludwig the Great:—the one, only great
by courtesy; the other, fat beyond a peradventure. But they are equally
famous; and in their graves, both on a par. For after devouring many a
fair province, and grinding the poor of his realm, Ludwig the Great has
long since, himself, been devoured by very small worms, and ground into
very fine dust. And after stripping many a venison rib, Ludwig the Fat
has had his own polished and bleached in the Valley of Death; yea, and
his cranium chased with corrodings, like the carved flagon once held to
its jaws.”

“My lord! my lord!”—cried Abrazza to Media—“this ghastly devil of yours
grins worse than a skull. I feel the worms crawling over me!—By Oro we
must eject him!”

“No, no, my lord. Let him sit there, as of old the Death’s-head graced
the feasts of the Pharaohs—let him sit—let him sit—for Death but
imparts a flavor to Life—Go on: wag your tongue without fear,
Azzageddi!—But come, Braid-Beard! let’s hear more of the Ludwigs.”

“Well, then, your Highness, of all the eighteen royal Ludwigs of
Franko—”

“Who like so many ten-pins, all in a row,” interposed Babbalanja— “have
been bowled off the course by grim Death.”

“Heed him not,” said Media—“go on.”

“The Debonnaire, the Pious, the Stammerer, the Do-Nothing, the
Juvenile, the Quarreler:—of all these, I say, Ludwig the Fat was the
best table-man of them all. Such a full orbed paunch was his, that no
way could he devise of getting to his suppers, but by getting right
into them. Like the Zodiac his table was circular, and full in the
middle he sat, like a sun;—all his jolly stews and ragouts revolving
around him.”

“Yea,” said Babbalanja, “a very round sun was Ludwig the Fat. No wonder
he’s down in the chronicles; several ells about the waist, and King of
cups and Tokay. Truly, a famous king: three hundred-weight of lard,
with a diadem on top: lean brains and a fat doublet—a demijohn of a
demi-god!”

“Is this to be longer borne?” cried Abrazza, starting up. “Quaff that
sneer down, devil! on the instant! down with it, to the dregs! This
comes, my lord Media, of having a slow drinker at one’s board. Like an
iceberg, such a fellow frosts the whole atmosphere of a banquet, and is
felt a league off We must thrust him out. Guards!”

“Back! touch him not, hounds!”—cried Media. “Your pardon, my lord, but
we’ll keep him to it; and melt him down in this good wine. Drink! I
command it, drink, Babbalanja!”

“And am I not drinking, my lord? Surely you would not that I should
imbibe more than I can hold. The measure being full, all poured in
after that is but wasted. I am for being temperate in these things, my
good lord. And my one cup outlasts three of yours. Better to sip a
pint, than pour down a quart. All things in moderation are good;
whence, wine in moderation is good. But all things in excess are bad:
whence wine in excess is bad.”

“Away with your logic and conic sections! Drink!—But no, no: I am too
severe. For of all meals a supper should be the most social and free.
And going thereto we kings, my lord, should lay aside our scepters.— Do
as you please Babbalanja.”

“You are right, you are right, after all, my dear demi-god,” said
Abrazza. “And to say truth, I seldom worry myself with the ways of
these mortals; for no thanks do we demi-gods get. We kings should be
ever indifferent. Nothing like a cold heart; warm ones are ever
chafing, and getting into trouble. I let my mortals here in this isle
take heed to themselves; only barring them out when they would thrust
in their petitions. This very instant, my lord, my yeoman-guard is on
duty without, to drive off intruders.—Hark!—what noise is that?—Ho, who
comes?”

At that instant, there burst into the hall, a crowd of spearmen, driven
before a pale, ragged rout, that loudly invoked King Abrazza.

“Pardon, my lord king, for thus forcing an entrance! But long in vain
have we knocked at thy gates! Our grievances are more than we can bear!
Give ear to our spokesman, we beseech!”

And from their tumultuous midst, they pushed forward a tall, grim,
pine-tree of a fellow, who loomed up out of the throng, like the Peak
of Teneriffe among the Canaries in a storm.

“Drive the knaves out! Ho, cowards, guards, turn about! charge upon
them! Away with your grievances! Drive them out, I say, drive them
out!—High times, truly, my lord Media, when demi-gods are thus annoyed
at their wine. Oh, who would reign over mortals!”

So at last, with much difficulty, the ragged rout were ejected; the
Peak of Teneriffe going last, a pent storm on his brow; and muttering
about some black time that was corning.

While the hoarse murmurs without still echoed through the hall, King
Abrazza refilling his cup thus spoke:—“You were saying, my dear lord,
that of all meals a supper is the most social and free. Very true. And
of all suppers those given by us bachelor demi-gods are the best. Are
they not?”

“They are. For Benedict mortals must be home betimes: bachelor
demi-gods are never away.”

“Ay, your Highnesses, bachelors are all the year round at home;” said
Mohi: “sitting out life in the chimney corner, cozy and warm as the
dog, whilome turning the old-fashioned roasting jack.”

“And to us bachelor demi-gods,” cried Media “our to-morrows are as long
rows of fine punches, ranged on a board, and waiting the hand.”

“But my good lords,” said Babbalanja, now brightening with wine; “if,
of all suppers those given by bachelors be the best:—of all bachelors,
are not your priests and monks the jolliest? I mean, behind the scenes?
Their prayers all said, and their futurities securely invested,—who so
carefree and cozy as they? Yea, a supper for two in a friar’s cell in
Maramma, is merrier far, than a dinner for five-and-twenty, in the
broad right wing of Donjalolo’s great Palace of the Morn.”

“Bravo, Babbalanja!” cried Media, “your iceberg is thawing. More of
that, more of that. Did I not say, we would melt him down at last, my
lord?”

“Ay,” continued Babbalanja, “bachelors are a noble fraternity: I’m a
bachelor myself. One of ye, in that matter, my lord demi-gods. And if
unlike the patriarchs of the world, we father not our brigades and
battalions; and send not out into the battles of our country whole
regiments of our own individual raising;—yet do we oftentimes leave
behind us goodly houses and lands; rare old brandies and mountain
Malagas; and more especially, warm doublets and togas, and
spatterdashes, wherewithal to keep comfortable those who survive us;—
casing the legs and arms, which others beget. Then compare not
invidiously Benedicts with bachelors, since thus we make an equal
division of the duties, which both owe to posterity.”

“Suppers forever!” cried Media. “See, my lord, what yours has done for
Babbalanja. He came to it a skeleton; but will go away, every bone
padded!”

“Ay, my lord demi-gods,” said Babbalanja, drop by drop refilling his
goblet. “These suppers are all very fine, very pleasant, and merry. But
we pay for them roundly. Every thing, my good lords, has its price,
from a marble to a world. And easier of digestion, and better for both
body and soul, are a half-haunch of venison and a gallon of mead, taken
under the sun at meridian, than the soft bridal breast of a partridge,
with some gentle negus, at the noon of night!”

“No lie that!” said Mohi. “Beshrew me, in no well-appointed mansion
doth the pantry lie adjoining the sleeping chamber. A good thought:
I’ll fill up, and ponder on it.”

“Let not Azzageddi get uppermost again, Babbalanja,” cried Media. “Your
goblet is only half-full.”

“Permit it to remain so; my lord. For whoso takes much wine to bed with
him, has a bedfellow, more restless than a somnambulist. And though
Wine be a jolly blade at the board, a sulky knave is he under a
blanket. I know him of old. Yet, your Highness, for all this, to many a
Mardian, suppers are still better than dinners, at whatever cost
purchased. Forasmuch, as many have more leisure to sup, than dine. And
though you demi-gods, may dine at your ease; and dine it out into
night: and sit and chirp over your Burgundy, till the morning larks
join your crickets, and wed matins to vespers;—far otherwise, with us
plebeian mortals. From our dinners, we must hie to our anvils: and the
last jolly jorum evaporates in a cark and a care.”

“Methinks he relapses,” said Abrazza.

“It waxes late,” said Mohi; “your Highnesses, is it not time to break
up?”

“No, no!”, cried Abrazza; “let the day break when it will: but no
breakings for us. It’s only midnight. This way with the wine; pass it
along, my dear Media. We are young yet, my sweet lord; light hearts and
heavy purses; short prayers and long rent-rolls. Pass round the Tokay!
We demi-gods have all our old age for a dormitory. Come!—Round and
round with the flagons! Let them disappear like mile-stones on a
race-course!”

“Ah!” murmured Babbalanja, holding his full goblet at arm’s length on
the board, “not thus with the hapless wight, born with a hamper on his
back, and blisters in his palms.—Toil and sleep—sleep and toil, are his
days and his nights; he goes to bed with a lumbago, and wakes with the
rheumatics;—I know what it is;—he snatches lunches, not dinners, and
makes of all life a cold snack! Yet praise be to Oro, though to such
men dinners are scarce worth the eating; nevertheless, praise Oro
again, a good supper is something. Off jack-boots; nay, off shirt, if
you will, and go at it. Hurrah! the fagged day is done: the last blow
is an echo. Twelve long hours to sunrise! And would it were an
Antarctic night, and six months to to-morrow! But, hurrah! the very
bees have their hive, and after a day’s weary wandering, hie home to
their honey. So they stretch out their stiff legs, rub their lame
elbows, and putting their tired right arms in a sling, set the others
to fetching and carrying from dishes to dentals, from foaming flagon to
the demijohn which never pours out at the end you pour in. Ah! after
all, the poorest devil in Mardi lives not in vain. There’s a soft side
to the hardest oak-plank in the world!”

“Methinks I have heard some such sentimental gabble as this before from
my slaves, my lord,” said Abrazza to Media. “It has the old gibberish
flavor.”

“Gibberish, your Highness? Gibberish? I’m full of it—I’m a gibbering
ghost, my right worshipful lord! Here, pass your hand through me— here,
_here_, and scorch it where I most burn. By Oro! King! but I will gibe
and gibber at thee, till thy crown feels like another skull clapped on
thy own. Gibberish? ay, in hell we’ll gibber in concert, king! we’ll
howl, and roast, and hiss together!”

“Devil that thou art, begone! Ho, guards! seize him!”

“Back, curs!” cried Media. “Harm not a hair of his head. I crave
pardon, King Abrazza, but no violence must be done Babbalanja.”

“Trumpets there!” said Abrazza; “so: the banquet is done—lights for
King Media! Good-night, my lord!”

Now, thus, for the nonce, with good cheer, we close. And after many
fine dinners and banquets—through light and through shade; through
mirth, sorrow, and all—drawing nigh to the evening end of these
wanderings wild—meet is it that all should be regaled with a supper.




CHAPTER LXXVIII.
They Embark


Next morning, King Abrazza sent frigid word to Media that the day was
very fine for yachting; but he much regretted that indisposition would
prevent his making one of the party, who that morning doubtless would
depart his isle.

“My compliments to your king,” said Media to the chamberlains, “and say
the royal notice to quit was duly received.”

“Take Azzageddi’s also,” said Babbalanja; “and say, I hope his Highness
will not fail in his appointment with me:—the first midnight after he
dies; at the grave-yard corner;—there I’ll be, and grin again!”

Sailing on, the next land we saw was thickly wooded: hedged round about
by mangrove trees; which growing in the water, yet lifted high their
boughs. Here and there were shady nooks, half verdure and half water.
Fishes rippled, and canaries sung.

“Let us break through, my lord,” said Yoomy, “and seek the shore. Its
solitudes must prove reviving.” “Solitudes they are,” cried Mohi.

“Peopled but not enlivened,” said Babbalanja. “Hard landing here,
minstrel! see you not the isle is hedged?”

“Why, break through, then,” said Media. “Yillah is not here.”

“I mistrusted it,” sighed Yoomy; “an imprisoned island! full of
uncomplaining woes: like many others we must have glided by,
unheedingly. Yet of them have I heard. This isle many pass, marking its
outward brightness, but dreaming not of the sad secrets here embowered.
Haunt of the hopeless! In those inland woods brood Mardians who have
tasted Mardi, and found it bitter—the draught so sweet to
others!—maidens whose unimparted bloom has cankered in the bud; and
children, with eyes averted from life’s dawn—like those new-oped
morning blossoms which, foreseeing storms, turn and close.”

“Yoomy’s rendering of the truth,” said Mohi.

“Why land, then?” said Media. “No merry man of sense—no demi-god like
me, will do it. Let’s away; let’s see all that’s pleasant, or that
seems so, in our circuit, and, if possible, shun the sad.”

“Then we have circled not the round reef wholly,” said Babbalanja, “but
made of it a segment. For this is far from being the first sad land, my
lord, that we have slighted at your instance.”

“No more. I will have no gloom. A chorus! there, ye paddlers! spread
all your sails; ply paddles; breeze up, merry winds!”

And so, in the saffron sunset, we neared another shore.

A gloomy-looking land! black, beetling crags, rent by volcanic clefts;
ploughed up with water-courses, and dusky with charred woods. The beach
was strewn with scoria and cinders; in dolorous soughs, a chill wind
blew; wails issued from the caves; and yellow, spooming surges, lashed
the moaning strand.

“Shall we land?” said Babbalanja.

“Not here,” cried Yoomy; “no Yillah here.”

“No,” said Media. “This is another of those lands far better to avoid.”

“Know ye not,” said Mohi, “that here are the mines of King Klanko,
whose scourged slaves, toiling in their pits, so nigh approach the
volcano’s bowels, they hear its rumblings? ‘Yet they must work on,’
cries Klanko, ‘the mines still yield!’ And daily his slaves’ bones are
brought above ground, mixed with the metal masses.”

“Set all sail there, men! away!”

“My lord,” said Babbalanja; “still must we shun the unmitigated evil;
and only view the good; or evil so mixed therewith, the mixture’s
both?”

Half vailed in misty clouds, the harvest-moon now rose; and in that
pale and haggard light, all sat silent; each man in his own secret
mood: best knowing his own thoughts.




CHAPTER LXXIX.
Babbalanja At The Full Of The Moon


“Ho, mortals! Go we to a funeral, that our paddles seem thus muffled?
Up heart, Taji! or does that witch Hautia haunt thee? Be a demi-god
once more, and laugh. Her flowers are not barbs; and the avengers’
arrows are too blunt to slay. Babbalanja! Mohi! Yoomy! up heart! up
heart!—By Oro! I will debark the whole company on the next land we
meet. No tears for me. Ha, ha! let us laugh. Ho, Vee-Vee! awake; quick,
boy,—some wine! and let us make glad, beneath the glad moon. Look! it
is stealing forth from its clouds. Perdition to Hautia! Long lives, and
merry ones to ourselves! Taji, my charming fellow, here’s to you:—May
your heart be a stone! Ha, ha!—will nobody join me? My laugh is lonely
as his who laughed in his tomb. Come, laugh; will no one quaff wine, I
say? See! the round moon is abroad.”

“Say you so, my lord? then for one, I am with you;” cried Babbalanja.
“Fill me a brimmer. Ah! but this wine leaps through me like a panther.
Ay, let us laugh: let us roar: let us yell! What, if I was sad but just
now? Life is an April day, that both laughs and weeps in a breath. But
whoso is wise, laughs when he can. Men fly from a groan; but run to a
laugh. Vee-Vee! your gourd. My lord, let me help you. Ah, how it
sparkles! Cups, cups, Vee-Vee, more cups! Here, Taji, take that: Mohi,
take that: Yoomy, take that. And now let us drown away grief. Ha! ha!
the house of mourning, is deserted, though of old good cheer kept the
funeral guests; and so keep I mine; here I sit by my dead, and
replenish your wine cups. Old Mohi, your cup: Yoomy, yours: ha! ha! let
us laugh, let us scream! Weeds are put off at a fair; no heart bursts
but in secret; it is good to laugh, though the laugh be hollow; and
wise to make merry, now and for aye. Laugh, and make friends: weep, and
they go. Women sob, and are rid of their grief: men laugh, and retain
it. There is laughter in heaven, and laughter in hell. And a deep
thought whose language is laughter. Though wisdom be wedded to woe,
though the way thereto is by tears, yet all ends in a shout. But wisdom
wears no weeds; woe is more merry than mirth; ’tis a shallow grief that
is sad. Ha! ha! how demoniacs shout; how all skeletons grin; we all die
with a rattle. Laugh! laugh! Are the cherubim grave? Humor, thy laugh
is divine; whence, mirth-making idiots have been revered; and therefore
may I. Ho! let us be gay, if it be only for an hour, and Death hand us
the goblet. Vee-Vee! bring on your gourds! Let us pledge each other in
bumpers!—let us laugh, laugh, laugh it out to the last. All sages have
laughed,—let us; Bardianna laughed, let us; Demorkriti laughed,—let us:
Amoree laughed,—let us; Rabeelee roared,—let us; the hyenas grin, the
jackals yell,—let us.—But you don’t laugh, my lord? laugh away!”

“No, thank you, Azzageddi, not after that infernal fashion; better
weep.”

“He makes me crawl all over, as if I were an ant-hill,” said Mohi.

“He’s mad, mad, mad!” cried Yoomy.

“Ay, mad, mad, mad!—mad as the mad fiend that rides me!—But come, sweet
minstrel, wilt list to a song?—We madmen are all poets, you know:—Ha!
ha!—

Stars laugh in the sky:
    Oh fugle-fi I
The waves dimple below:
    Oh fugle-fo!


“The wind strikes her dulcimers; the groves give a shout; the hurricane
is only an hysterical laugh; and the lightning that blasts, blasts only
in play. We must laugh or we die; to laugh is to live. Not to laugh is
to have the tetanus. Will you weep? then laugh while you weep. For
mirth and sorrow are kin; are published by identical nerves. Go, Yoomy:
go study anatomy: there is much to be learned from the dead, more than
you may learn from the living and I am dead though I live; and as soon
dissect myself as another; I curiously look into my secrets: and grope
under my ribs. I have found that the heart is not whole, but divided;
that it seeks a soft cushion whereon to repose; that it vitalizes the
blood; which else were weaker than water: I have found that we can not
live without hearts; though the heartless live longest. Yet hug your
hearts, ye handful that have them; ’tis a blessed inheritance! Thus,
thus, my lord, I run on; from one pole to the other; from this thing to
that. But so the great world goes round, and in one Somerset, shows the
sun twenty-five thousand miles of a landscape!”

At that instant, down went the fiery full-moon, and the Dog-Star; and
far down into Media, a Tivoli of wine.




CHAPTER LXXX.
Morning


Life or death, weal or woe, the sun stays not his course. On: over
battle-field and bower; over tower, and town, he speeds,—peers in at
births, and death-beds; lights up cathedral, mosque, and pagan
shrine;—laughing over all;—a very Democritus in the sky; and in one
brief day sees more than any pilgrim in a century’s round.

So, the sun; nearer heaven than we:—with what mind, then, may blessed
Oro downward look.

It was a purple, red, and yellow East;—streaked, and crossed. And down
from breezy mountains, robust and ruddy Morning came,—a plaided
Highlander, waving his plumed bonnet to the isles.

Over the neighboring groves the larks soared high; and soaring, sang in
jubilees; while across our bows, between two isles, a mighty moose swam
stately as a seventy-four; and backward tossed his antlered wilderness
in air.

Just bounding from fresh morning groves, with the brine he mixed the
dew of leaves,—his antlers dripping on the swell, that rippled before
his brown and bow-like chest.

“Five hundred thousand centuries since,” said Babbalanja, “this same
sight was seen. With Oro, the sun is co-eternal; and the same life that
moves that moose, animates alike the sun and Oro. All are parts of One.
In me, in _me_, flit thoughts participated by the beings peopling all
the stars. Saturn, and Mercury, and Mardi, are brothers, one and all;
and across their orbits, to each other talk, like souls. Of these
things what chapters might be writ! Oh! that flesh can not keep pace
with spirit. Oh! that these myriad germ-dramas in me, should so perish
hourly, for lack of power mechanic.—Worlds pass worlds in space, as
men, men,—in thoroughfares; and after periods of thousand years,
cry:—“Well met, my friend, again!”—To me to _me_, they talk in mystic
music; I hear them think through all their zones. —Hail, furthest
worlds! and all the beauteous beings in ye! Fan me, sweet Zenora! with
thy twilight wings!—Ho! let’s voyage to Aldebaran.—Ha! indeed, a ruddy
world! What a buoyant air! Not like to Mardi, this. Ruby columns:
minarets of amethyst: diamond domes! Who is this?—a god? What a
lake-like brow! transparent as the morning air. I see his thoughts like
worlds revolving—and in his eyes—like unto heavens—soft falling stars
are shooting.—How these thousand passing wings winnow away my breath:—I
faint:—back, back to some small asteroid.—Sweet being! if, by Mardian
word I may address thee— speak!—‘I bear a soul in germ within me; I
feel the first, faint trembling, like to a harp-string, vibrate in my
inmost being. Kill me, and generations die.’—So, of old, the unbegotten
lived within the virgin; who then loved her God, as new-made mothers
their babes ere born. Oh, Alma, Alma, Alma!—Fangs off, fiend!—will that
name ever lash thee into foam?—Smite not my face so, forked flames!”

“Babbalanja! Babbalanja! rouse, man! rouse! Art in hell and damned,
that thy sinews so snake-like coil and twist all over thee? Thy brow is
black as Ops! Turn, turn! see yonder moose!”

“Hail! mighty brute!—thou feelest not these things: never canst _thou_
be damned. Moose! would thy soul were mine; for if that scorched thing,
mine, be immortal—so thine; and thy life hath not the consciousness of
death. I read profound placidity—deep—million— violet fathoms down, in
that soft, pathetic, woman eye! What is man’s shrunk form to thine,
thou woodland majesty?—Moose, moose!—my soul is shot again—Oh, Oro!
Oro!”

“He falls!” cried Media.

“Mark the agony in his waning eye,” said Yoomy;—“alas, poor Babbalanja!
Is this thing of madness conscious to thyself? If ever thou art sane
again, wilt thou have reminiscences? Take my robe:— here, I strip me to
cover thee and all thy woes. Oro! by this, thy being’s side, I
kneel:—grant death or happiness to Babbalanja!”




CHAPTER LXXXI.
L’ultima Sera


Thus far, through myriad islands, had we searched: of all, no one pen
may write: least, mine;—and still no trace of Yillah.

But though my hopes revived not from their ashes; yet, so much of Mardi
had we searched, it seemed as if the long pursuit must, ere many moons,
be ended; whether for weal or woe, my frenzy sometimes reeked not.

After its first fair morning flushings, all that day was overcast. We
sailed upon an angry sea, beneath an angry sky. Deep scowled on deep;
and in dun vapors, the blinded sun went down, unseen; though full
toward the West our three prows were pointed; steadfast as three
printed points upon the compass-card.

“When we set sail from Odo, ’twas a glorious morn in spring,” said
Yoomy; “toward the rising sun we steered. But now, beneath autumnal
night-clouds, we hasten to its setting.”

“How now?” cried Media; “why is the minstrel mournful?—He whose place
it is to chase away despondency: not be its minister.”

“Ah, my lord, so _thou_ thinkest. But better can my verses soothe the
sad, than make them light of heart. Nor are we minstrels so gay of soul
as Mardi deems us. The brook that sings the sweetest, murmurs through
the loneliest woods:

The isles hold thee not, thou departed!
    From thy bower, now issues no lay:—
In vain we recall perished warblings:
    Spring birds, to far climes, wing their way!”


As Yoomy thus sang; unmindful of the lay, with paddle plying, in low,
pleasant tones, thus hummed to himself our bowsman, a gamesome wight:—

Ho! merrily ho! we paddlers sail!
Ho! over sea-dingle, and dale!—
    Our pulses fly,
    Our hearts beat high,
Ho! merrily, merrily, ho!


But a sudden splash, and a shrill, gurgling sound, like that of a
fountain subsiding, now broke upon the air. Then all was still, save
the rush of the waves by our keels.

“Save him! Put back!”

From his elevated seat, the merry bowsman, too gleefully reaching
forward, had fallen into the lagoon.

With all haste, our speeding canoes were reversed; but not till we had
darted in upon another darkness than that in which the bowsman fell.

As, blindly, we groped back, deep Night dived deeper down in the sea.

“Drop paddles all, and list.”

Holding their breath, over the six gunwales all now leaned; but the
only moans were the wind’s.

Long time we lay thus; then slowly crossed and recrossed our track,
almost hopeless; but yet loth to leave him who, with a song in his
mouth, died and was buried in a breath.

“Let us away,” said Media—“why seek more? He is gone.”

“Ay, gone,” said Babbalanja, “and whither? But a moment since, he was
among us: now, the fixed stars are not more remote than he. So far off,
can he live? Oh, Oro! this death thou ordainest, unmans the manliest.
Say not nay, my lord. Let us not speak behind Death’s back. Hard and
horrible is it to die: blindfold to leap from life’s verge! But thus,
in clouds of dust, and with a trampling as of hoofs, the generations
disappear; death driving them all into his treacherous fold, as wild
Indians the bison herds. Nay, nay, Death is Life’s last despair. Hard
and horrible is it to die. Oro himself, in Alma, died not without a
groan. Yet why, why live? Life is wearisome to all: the same dull
round. Day and night, summer and winter, round about us revolving for
aye. One moment lived, is a life. No new stars appear in the sky; no
new lights in the soul. Yet, of changes there are many. For though,
with rapt sight, in childhood, we behold many strange things beneath
the moon, and all Mardi looks a tented fair— how soon every thing
fades. All of us, in our very bodies, outlive our own selves. I think
of green youth as of a merry playmate departed; and to shake hands, and
be pleasant with my old age, seems in prospect even harder, than to
draw a cold stranger to my bosom. But old age is not for me. I am not
of the stuff that grows old. This Mardi is not our home. Up and down we
wander, like exiles transported to a planet afar:—’tis not the world
_we_ were born in; not the world once so lightsome and gay; not the
world where we once merrily danced, dined, and supped; and wooed, and
wedded our long-buried wives. Then let us depart. But whither? We push
ourselves forward then, start back in affright. Essay it again, and
flee. Hard to live; hard to die; intolerable suspense! But the grim
despot at last interposes; and with a viper in our winding-sheets, we
are dropped in the sea.”

“To me,” said Mohi, his gray locks damp with night-dews, “death’s dark
defile at times seems at hand, with no voice to cheer. That all have
died, makes it not easier for me to depart. And that many have been
quenched in infancy seems a mercy to the slow perishing of my old age,
limb by limb and sense by sense. I have long been the tomb of my youth.
And more has died out of me, already, than remains for the last death
to finish. Babbalanja says truth. In childhood, death stirred me not;
in middle age, it pursued me like a prowling bandit on the road; now,
grown an old man, it boldly leads the way; and ushers me on; and turns
round upon me its skeleton gaze: poisoning the last solaces of life.
Maramma but adds to my gloom.”

“Death! death!” cried Yoomy, “must I be not, and millions be? Must I
go, and the flowers still bloom? Oh, I have marked what it is to be
dead;—how shouting boys, of holidays, hide-and-seek among the tombs,
which must hide all seekers at last.”

“Clouds on clouds!” cried Media, “but away with them all! Why not leap
your graves, while ye may? Time to die, when death comes, without dying
by inches. ’Tis no death, to die; the only death is the fear of it. I,
a demi-god, fear death not.”

“But when the jackals howl round you?” said Babbalanja.

“Drive them off! Die the demi-god’s death! On his last couch of crossed
spears, my brave old sire cried, ‘Wine, wine; strike up, conch and
cymbal; let the king die to martial melodies!’”

“More valiant dying, than dead,” said Babbalanja. “Our end of the
winding procession resounds with music and flaunts with banners with
brave devices: ‘Cheer up!’ ‘Fear not!’ ‘Millions have died before!’—
but in the endless van, not a pennon streams; all there, is silent and
solemn. The last wisdom is dumb.”

Silence ensued; during which, each dip of the paddles in the now calm
water, fell full and long upon the ear.

Anon, lifting his head, Babbalanja thus:—“Yillah still eludes us. And
in all this tour of Mardi, how little have we found to fill the heart
with peace: how much to slaughter all our yearnings.”

“Croak no more, raven!” cried Media. “Mardi is full of spring-time
sights, and jubilee sounds. I never was sad in my life.”

“But for thy one laugh, my lord, how many groans! Were all happy, or
all miserable,—more tolerable then, than as it is. But happiness and
misery are so broadly marked, that this Mardi may be the retributive
future of some forgotten past.—Yet vain our surmises. Still vainer to
say, that all Mardi is but a means to an end; that this life is a state
of probation: that evil is but permitted for a term; that for specified
ages a rebel angel is viceroy.—Nay, nay. Oro delegates his scepter to
none; in his everlasting reign there are no interregnums; and Time is
Eternity; and we live in Eternity now. Yet, some tell of a hereafter,
where all the mysteries of life will be over; and the sufferings of the
virtuous recompensed. Oro is just, they say.—Then always,—now, and
evermore. But to make restitution implies a wrong; and Oro can do no
wrong. Yet what seems evil to us, may be good to him. If he fears not,
nor hopes,—he has no other passion; no ends, no purposes. He lives
content; all ends are compassed in Him; He has no past, no future; He
is the everlasting now; which is an everlasting calm; and things that
are, have been,— will be. This gloom’s enough. But hoot! hoot! the
night-owl ranges through the woodlands of Maramma; its dismal notes
pervade our lives; and when we would fain depart in peace, that bird
flies on before:— cloud-like, eclipsing our setting suns, and filling
the air with dolor.”

“Too true!” cried Yoomy. “Our calms must come by storms. Like helmless
vessels, tempest-tossed, our only anchorage is when we founder.”

“Our beginnings,” murmured Mohi, “are lost in clouds; we live in
darkness all our days, and perish without an end.”

“Croak on, cowards!” cried Media, “and fly before the hideous phantoms
that pursue ye.”

“No coward he, who hunted, turns and finds no foe to fight,” said
Babbalanja. “Like the stag, whose brow is beat with wings of hawks,
perched in his heavenward antlers; so I, blinded, goaded, headlong,
rush! this way and that; nor knowing whither; one forest wide around!”




CHAPTER LXXXII.
They Sail From Night To Day


Ere long the three canoes lurched heavily in a violent swell. Like
palls, the clouds swept to and fro, hooding the gibbering winds. At
every head-beat wave, our arching prows reared up, and shuddered; the
night ran out in rain.

Whither to turn we knew not; nor what haven to gain; so dense the
darkness.

But at last, the storm was over. Our shattered prows seemed gilded. Day
dawned; and from his golden vases poured red wine upon the waters.

That flushed tide rippled toward us; floating from the east, a lone
canoe; in which, there sat a mild, old man; a palm-bough in his hand: a
bird’s beak, holding amaranth and myrtles, his slender prow.

“Alma’s blessing upon ye, voyagers! ye look storm-worn.”

“The storm we have survived, old man; and many more, we yet must ride,”
said Babbalanja.

“The sun is risen; and all is well again. We but need to repair our
prows,” said Media.

“Then, turn aside to Serenia, a pleasant isle, where all are welcome;
where many storm-worn rovers land at last to dwell.”

“Serenia?” said Babbalanja; “methinks Serenia is that land of
enthusiasts, of which we hear, my lord; where Mardians pretend to the
unnatural conjunction of reason with things revealed; where Alma, they
say, is restored to his divine original; where, deriving their
principles from the same sources whence flow the persecutions of
Maramma,—men strive to live together in gentle bonds of peace and
charity;—folly! folly!”

“Ay,” said Media; “much is said of those people of Serenia; but their
social fabric must soon fall to pieces; it is based upon the idlest of
theories. Thanks for thy courtesy, old man, but we care not to visit
thy isle. Our voyage has an object, which, something tells me, will not
be gained by touching at thy shores. Elsewhere we may refit. Farewell!
’Tis breezing; set the sails! Farewell, old man.”

“Nay, nay! think again; the distance is but small; the wind fair,—but
’tis ever so, thither;—come: we, people of Serenia, are most anxious to
be seen of Mardi; so that if our manner of life seem good, all Mardi
may live as we. In blessed Alma’s name, I pray ye, come!”

“Shall we then, my lord?”

“Lead on, old man! We will e’en see this wondrous isle.”

So, guided by the venerable stranger, by noon we descried an island
blooming with bright savannas, and pensive with peaceful groves.

Wafted from this shore, came balm of flowers, and melody of birds: a
thousand summer sounds and odors. The dimpled tide sang round our
splintered prows; the sun was high in heaven, and the waters were deep
below.

“The land of Love!” the old man murmured, as we neared the beach, where
innumerable shells were gently rolling in the playful surf, and
murmuring from their tuneful valves. Behind, another, and a verdant
surf played against lofty banks of leaves; where the breeze, likewise,
found its shore.

And now, emerging from beneath the trees, there came a goodly multitude
in flowing robes; palm-branches in their hands; and as they came, they
sang:—

        Hail! voyagers, hail!
Whence e’er ye come, where’er ye rove,
    No calmer strand,
    No sweeter land,
Will e’er ye view, than the Land of Love!

    Hail! voyagers, hail!
To these, our shores, soft gales invite:
    The palm plumes wave,
    The billows lave,
And hither point fix’d stars of light!

    Hail! voyagers, hail!
Think not our groves wide brood with gloom;
    In this, our isle,
    Bright flowers smile:
Full urns, rose-heaped, these valleys bloom.

    Hail! voyagers, hail!
Be not deceived; renounce vain things;
    Ye may not find
    A tranquil mind,
Though hence ye sail with swiftest wings.

    Hail! voyagers, hail!
Time flies full fast; life soon is o’er;
    And ye may mourn,
    That hither borne,
Ye left behind our pleasant shore.




CHAPTER LXXXIII.
They Land


The song was ended; and as we gained the strand, the crowd embraced us;
and called us brothers; ourselves and our humblest attendants.

“Call ye us brothers, whom ere now ye never saw?”

“Even so,” said the old man, “is not Oro the father of all? Then, are
we not brothers? Thus Alma, the master, hath commanded.”

“This was not our reception in Maramma,” said Media, “the appointed
place of Alma; where his precepts are preserved.”

“No, no,” said Babbalanja; “old man! your lesson of brotherhood was
learned elsewhere than from Alma; for in Maramma and in all its
tributary isles true brotherhood there is none. Even in the Holy Island
many are oppressed; for heresies, many murdered; and thousands perish
beneath the altars, groaning with offerings that might relieve them.”

“Alas! too true. But I beseech ye, judge not Alma by all those who
profess his faith. Hast thou thyself his records searched?”

“Fully, I have not. So long, even from my infancy, have I witnessed the
wrongs committed in his name; the sins and inconsistencies of his
followers; that thinking all evil must flow from a congenial fountain,
I have scorned to study the whole record of your Master’s life. By
parts I only know it.”

“Ah! baneful error! But thus is it, brothers!! that the wisest are set
against the Truth, because of those who wrest it from itself.”

“Do ye then claim to live what your Master hath spoken? Are your
precepts practices?”

“Nothing do we claim: we but earnestly endeavor.”

“Tell me not of your endeavors, but of your life. What hope for the
fatherless among ye?”

“Adopted as a son.”

“Of one poor, and naked?”

“Clothed, and he wants for naught.”

“If ungrateful, he smite you?”

“Still we feed and clothe him.”

“If yet an ingrate?”

“Long, he can not be; for Love is a fervent fire.”

“But what, if widely he dissent from your belief in Alma;—then, surely,
ye must cast him forth?”

“No, no; we will remember, that if he dissent from us, we then equally
dissent from him; and men’s faculties are Oro-given. Nor will we say
that he is wrong, and we are right; for this we know not, absolutely.
But we care not for men’s words; we look for creeds in actions; which
are the truthful symbols of the things within. He who hourly prays to
Alma, but lives not up to world-wide love and charity—that man is more
an unbeliever than he who verbally rejects the Master, but does his
bidding. Our lives are our Amens.”

“But some say that what your Alma teaches is wholly new—a revelation of
things before unimagined, even by the poets. To do his bidding, then,
some new faculty must be vouchsafed, whereby to apprehend aright.”

“So have I always thought,” said Mohi.

“If Alma teaches love, I want no gift to learn,” said Yoomy.

“All that is vital in the Master’s faith, lived here in Mardi, and in
humble dells was practiced, long previous to the Master’s coming. But
never before was virtue so lifted up among us, that all might see;
never before did rays from heaven descend to glorify it, But are Truth,
Justice, and Love, the revelations of Alma alone? Were they never heard
of till he came? Oh! Alma but opens unto us our own hearts. Were his
precepts strange we would recoil—not one feeling would respond;
whereas, once hearkened to, our souls embrace them as with the
instinctive tendrils of a vine.”

“But,” said Babbalanja, “since Alma, they say, was solely intent upon
the things of the Mardi to come—which to all, must seem uncertain—of
what benefit his precepts for the daily lives led here?”

“Would! would that Alma might once more descend! Brother! were the turf
our everlasting pillow, still would the Master’s faith answer a blessed
end;—making us more truly happy _here_. _That_ is the first and chief
result; for holy here, we must be holy elsewhere. ’Tis Mardi, to which
loved Alma gives his laws; not Paradise.”

“Full soon will I be testing all these things,” murmured Mohi.

“Old man,” said Media, “thy years and Mohi’s lead ye both to dwell upon
the unknown future. But speak to me of other themes. Tell me of this
island and its people. From all I have heard, and now behold, I gather
that here there dwells no king; that ye are left to yourselves; and
that this mystic Love, ye speak of, is your ruler. Is it so? Then, are
ye full as visionary, as Mardi rumors. And though for a time, ye may
have prospered,—long, ye can not be, without some sharp lesson to
convince ye, that your faith in Mardian virtue is entirely vain.”

“Truth. We have no king; for Alma’s precepts rebuke the arrogance of
place and power. He is the tribune of mankind; nor will his true faith
be universal Mardi’s, till our whole race is kingless. But think not we
believe in man’s perfection. Yet, against all good, he is not
absolutely set. In his heart, there is a germ. _That_ we seek to
foster. To _that_ we cling; else, all were hopeless!”

“Your social state?”

“It is imperfect; and long must so remain. But we make not the
miserable many support the happy few. Nor by annulling reason’s laws,
seek to breed equality, by breeding anarchy. In all things, equality is
not for all. Each has his own. Some have wider groves of palms than
others; fare better; dwell in more tasteful arbors; oftener renew their
fragrant thatch. Such differences must be. But none starve outright,
while others feast. By the abounding, the needy are supplied. Yet not
by statute, but from dictates, born half dormant in us, and warmed into
life by Alma. Those dictates we but follow in all we do; we are not
dragged to righteousness; but go running. Nor do we live in common. For
vice and virtue blindly mingled, form a union where vice too often
proves the alkali. The vicious we make dwell apart, until reclaimed.
And reclaimed they soon must be, since every thing invites. The sin of
others rests not upon our heads: none we drive to crime. Our laws are
not of vengeance bred, but Love and Alma.”

“Fine poetry all this,” said Babbalanja, “but not so new. Oft do they
warble thus in bland Maramma!”

“It sounds famously, old man!” said Media, “but men are men. Some must
starve; some be scourged.—Your doctrines are impracticable.”

“And are not these things enjoined by Alma? And would Alma inculcate
the impossible? of what merit, his precepts, unless they may be
practiced? But, I beseech ye, speak no more of Maramma. Alas! did Alma
revisit Mardi, think you, it would be among those Morals he would lay
his head?”

“No, no,” said Babbalanja, “as an intruder he came; and an intruder
would he be this day. On all sides, would he jar our social systems.”

“Not here, not here! Rather would we welcome Alma hungry and athirst,
than though he came floating hither on the wings of seraphs; the
blazing zodiac his diadem! In all his aspects we adore him; needing no
pomp and power to kindle worship. Though he came from Oro; though he
did miracles; though through him is life;—not for these things alone,
do we thus love him. We love him from, an instinct in us;—a fond,
filial, reverential feeling. And this would yet stir in our souls, were
death our end; and Alma incapable of befriending us. We love him
because we do.”

“Is this man divine?” murmured Babbalanja. “But thou speakest most
earnestly of adoring Alma:—I see no temples in your groves.”

“Because this isle is all one temple to his praise; every leaf is
consecrated his. We fix not Alma here and there; and say,—‘those groves
for Him, and these broad fields for us.’ It is all his own; and we
ourselves; our every hour of life; and all we are, and have.”

“Then, ye forever fast and pray; and stand and sing; as at long
intervals the censer-bearers in Maramma supplicate their gods.”

“Alma forbid! We never fast; our aspirations are our prayers; our lives
are worship. And when we laugh, with human joy at human things, —_then_
do we most sound great Oro’s praise, and prove the merit of sweet
Alma’s love! Our love in Alma makes us glad, not sad. Ye speak of
temples;—behold! ’tis by not building _them_, that we widen charity
among us. The treasures which, in the islands round about, are lavished
on a thousand fanes;—with these we every day relieve the Master’s
suffering disciples. In Mardi, Alma preached in open fields, —and must
his worshipers have palaces?”

“No temples, then no priests;” said Babbalanja, “for few priests will
enter where lordly arches form not the portal.”

“We have no priests, but one; and he is Alma’s self. We have his
precepts: we seek no comments but our hearts.”

“But without priests and temples, how long will flourish this your
faith?” said Media.

“For many ages has not this faith lived, in spite of priests and
temples? and shall it not survive them? What we believe, we hold
divine; and things divine endure forever.”

“But how enlarge your bounds? how convert the vicious, without
persuasion of some special seers? Must your religion go hand in hand
with all things secular?”

“We hold not, that one man’s words should be a gospel to the rest; but
that Alma’s words should be a gospel to us all. And not by precepts
would we have some few endeavor to persuade; but all, by practice, fix
convictions, that the life we lead is the life for all. We are
apostles, every one. Where’er we go, our faith we carry in our hands,
and hearts. It is our chiefest joy. We do not put it wide away six days
out of seven; and then, assume it. In it we all exult, and joy; as that
which makes us happy here; as that, without which, we could be happy
nowhere; as something meant for this time present, and henceforth for
aye. It is our vital mode of being; not an incident. And when we die,
this faith shall be our pillow; and when we rise, our staff; and at the
end, our crown. For we are all immortal. Here, Alma joins with our own
hearts, confirming nature’s promptings.”

“How eloquent he is!” murmured Babbalanja. “Some black cloud seems
floating from me. I begin to see. I come out in light. The sharp fang
tears me less. The forked flames wane. My soul sets back like ocean
streams, that sudden change their flow. Have I been sane? Quickened in
me is a hope. But pray you, old man—say on—methinks, that in your faith
must be much that jars with reason.”

“No, brother! Right-reason, and Alma, are the same; else Alma, not
reason, would we reject. The Master’s great command is Love; and here
do all things wise, and all things good, unite. Love is all in all. The
more we love, the more we know; and so reversed. Oro we love; this
isle; and our wide arms embrace all Mardi like its reef. How can we
err, thus feeling? We hear loved Alma’s pleading, prompting voice, in
every breeze, in every leaf; we see his earnest eye in every star and
flower.”

“Poetry!” cried Yoomy; “and poetry is truth! He stirs me.”

“When Alma dwelt in Mardi, ’twas with the poor and friendless. He fed
the famishing; he healed the sick; he bound up wounds. For every
precept that he spoke, he did ten thousand mercies. And Alma is our
loved example.”

“Sure, all this is in the histories!” said Mohi, starting.

“But not alone to poor and friendless, did Alma wend his charitable
way. From lowly places, he looked up; and long invoked great chieftains
in their state; and told them all their pride was vanity; and bade them
ask their souls. ‘In _me_,’ he cried, ‘is that heart of mild content,
which in vain ye seek in rank and title. I am Love: love ye then me.’”

“Cease, cease, old man!” cried Media; “thou movest me beyond my
seeming. What thoughts are these? Have done! Wouldst thou unking me?”

“Alma is for all; for high and low. Like heaven’s own breeze, he lifts
the lily from its lowly stem, and sweeps, reviving, through the palmy
groves. High thoughts he gives the sage, and humble trust the simple.
Be the measure what it may, his grace doth fill it to the brim. He lays
the lashings of the soul’s wild aspirations after things unseen; oil he
poureth on the waters; and stars come out of night’s black concave at
his great command. In him is hope for all; for all, unbounded joys.
Fast locked in his loved clasp, no doubts dismay. He opes the eye of
faith and shuts the eye of fear. He is all we pray for, and beyond;
all, that in the wildest hour of ecstasy, rapt fancy paints in bright
Auroras upon the soul’s wide, boundless Orient!”

“Oh, Alma, Alma! prince divine!” cried Babbalanja, sinking on his
knees—“in _thee_, at last, I find repose. Hope perches in my heart a
dove;—a thousand rays illume;—all Heaven’s a sun. Gone, gone! are all
distracting doubts. Love and Alma now prevail. I see with other
eyes:—Are these my hands? What wild, wild dreams were mine;—I have been
mad. Some things there are, we must not think of. Beyond one obvious
mark, all human lore is vain. Where have I lived till now? Had dark
Maramma’s zealot tribe but murmured to me as this old man, long since
had I, been wise! Reason no longer domineers; but still doth speak. All
I have said ere this, that wars with Alma’s precepts, I here recant.
Here I kneel, and own great Oro and his sovereign son.”

“And here another kneels and prays,” cried Yoomy.

“In Alma all my dreams are found, my inner longings for the Love
supreme, that prompts my every verse. Summer is in my soul.”

“Nor now, too late for these gray hairs,” cried Mohi, with devotion.
“Alma, thy breath is on my soul. I see bright light.”

“No more a demigod,” cried Media, “but a subject to our common chief.
No more shall dismal cries be heard from Odo’s groves. Alma, I am
thine.”

With swimming eyes the old man kneeled; and round him grouped king,
sage, gray hairs, and youth.

There, as they kneeled, and as the old man blessed them, the setting
sun burst forth from mists, gilded the island round about, shed rays
upon their heads, and went down in a glory—all the East radiant with
red burnings, like an altar-fire.




CHAPTER LXXXIV.
Babbalanja Relates To Them A Vision


Leaving Babbalanja in the old man’s bower, deep in meditation;
thoughtfully we strolled along the beach, inspiring the musky, midnight
air; the tropical stars glistening in heaven, like drops of dew among
violets.

The waves were phosphorescent, and laved the beach with a fire that
cooled it.

Returning, we espied Babbalanja advancing in his snow-white mantle. The
fiery tide was ebbing; and in the soft, moist sand, at every step, he
left a lustrous foot-print.

“Sweet friends! this isle is full of mysteries,” he said. “I have
dreamed of wondrous things. After I had laid me down, thought pressed
hard upon me. By my eyes passed pageant visions. I started at a low,
strange melody, deep in my inmost soul. At last, methought my eyes were
fixed on heaven; and there, I saw a shining spot, unlike a star.
Thwarting the sky, it grew, and grew, descending; till bright wings
were visible: between them, a pensive face angelic, downward beaming;
and, for one golden moment, gauze-vailed in spangled Berenice’s Locks.

“Then, as white flame from yellow, out from that starry cluster it
emerged; and brushed the astral Crosses, Crowns, and Cups. And as in
violet, tropic seas, ships leave a radiant-white, and fire-fly wake;
so, in long extension tapering, behind the vision, gleamed another
Milky-Way.

“Strange throbbings seized me; my soul tossed on its own tides. But
soon the inward harmony bounded in exulting choral strains. I heard a
feathery rush; and straight beheld a form, traced all over with veins
of vivid light. The vision undulated round me.

“‘Oh! Spirit!! angel! god! whate’er thou art,’—I cried, ‘leave me; I am
but man.’

“Then, I heard a low, sad sound, no voice. It said, or breathed upon
me,—‘Thou hast proved the grace of Alma: tell me what thou’st learned.’

“Silent replied my soul, for voice was gone,—‘This have I learned, oh!
spirit!—In things mysterious, to seek no more; but rest content, with
knowing naught but Love.’

“‘Blessed art thou for that: thrice blessed,’ then I heard, and since
humility is thine, thou art one apt to learn. That which thy own wisdom
could not find, thy ignorance confessed shall gain. Come, and see new
things.’

“Once more it undulated round me; its lightning wings grew dim; nearer,
nearer; till I felt a shock electric,—and nested ’neath its wing.

“We clove the air; passed systems, suns, and moons: what seem from
Mardi’s isles, the glow-worm stars.

“By distant fleets of worlds we sped, as voyagers pass far sails at
sea, and hail them not. Foam played before them as they darted on; wild
music was their wake; and many tracks of sound we crossed, where worlds
had sailed before.

“Soon, we gained a point, where a new heaven was seen; whence all our
firmament seemed one nebula. Its glories burned like thousand
steadfast-flaming lights.

“Here hived the worlds in swarms: and gave forth sweets ineffable.

“We lighted on a ring, circling a space, where mornings seemed forever
dawning over worlds unlike.

“‘Here,’ I heard, ‘thou viewest thy Mardi’s Heaven. Herein each world
is portioned.’

“As he who climbs to mountain tops pants hard for breath; so panted I
for Mardi’s grosser air. But that which caused my flesh to faint, was
new vitality to my soul. My eyes swept over all before me. The spheres
were plain as villages that dot a landscape. I saw most beauteous
forms, yet like our own. Strange sounds I heard of gladness that seemed
mixed with sadness:—a low, sweet harmony of both. Else, I know not how
to phrase what never man but me e’er heard.

“‘In these blest souls are blent,’ my guide discoursed, ‘far higher
thoughts, and sweeter plaints than thine. Rude joy were discord here.
And as a sudden shout in thy hushed mountain-passes brings down the
awful avalanche; so one note of laughter here, might start some white
and silent world.’

“Then low I murmured:—‘Is their’s, oh guide! no happiness supreme?
their state still mixed? Sigh these yet to know? Can these sin?’

“Then I heard:—‘No mind but Oro’s can know all; no mind that knows not
all can be content; content alone approximates to happiness. Holiness
comes by wisdom; and it is because great Oro is supremely wise, that
He’s supremely holy. But as perfect wisdom can be only Oro’s; so,
perfect holiness is his alone. And whoso is otherwise than perfect in
his holiness, is liable to sin.

“‘And though death gave these beings knowledge, it also opened other
mysteries, which they pant to know, and yet may learn. And still they
fear the thing of evil; though for them, ’tis hard to fall. Thus hoping
and thus fearing, then, their’s is no state complete. And since Oro is
past finding out, and mysteries ever open into mysteries beyond; so,
though these beings will for aye progress in wisdom and in good; yet,
will they never gain a fixed beatitude. Know, then, oh mortal Mardian!
that when translated hither, thou wilt but put off lowly temporal
pinings, for angel and eternal aspirations. Start not: thy human joy
hath here no place: no name.

“Still, I mournful mused; then said:—‘Many Mardians live, who have no
aptitude for Mardian lives of thought: how then endure more earnest,
everlasting, meditations?’

“‘Such have their place,’ I heard.

“‘Then low I moaned, ‘And what, oh! guide! of those who, living
thoughtless lives of sin, die unregenerate; no service done to Oro or
to Mardian?’

“‘They, too, have their place,’ I heard; ‘but ’tis not here. And
Mardian! know, that as your Mardian lives are long preserved through
strict obedience to the organic law, so are your spiritual lives
prolonged by fast keeping of the law of mind. Sin is death.’

“‘Ah, then,’ yet lower moan made I; ‘and why create the germs that sin
and suffer, but to perish?’

“‘That,’ breathed my guide; ‘is the last mystery which underlieth all
the rest. Archangel may not fathom it; that makes of Oro the
everlasting mystery he is; that to divulge, were to make equal to
himself in knowledge all the souls that are; that mystery Oro guards;
and none but him may know.’

“Alas! were it recalled, no words have I to tell of all that now my
guide discoursed, concerning things unsearchable to us. My sixth sense
which he opened, sleeps again, with all the wisdom that it gained.

“Time passed; it seemed a moment, might have been an age; when from
high in the golden haze that canopied this heaven, another angel came;
its vans like East and West; a sunrise one, sunset the other. As
silver-fish in vases, so, in his azure eyes swam tears unshed.

“Quick my guide close nested me; through its veins the waning light
throbbed hard.

“‘Oh, spirit! archangel! god! whate’er thou art,’ it breathed; ‘leave
me: I am but blessed, not glorified.’

“So saying, as down from doves, from its wings dropped sounds. Still
nesting me, it crouched its plumes.

“Then, in a snow of softest syllables, thus breathed the greater and
more beautiful:—‘From far away, in fields beyond thy ken, I heard thy
fond discourse with this lone Mardian. It pleased me well; for thy
humility was manifeat; no arrogance of knowing. Come _thou_ and learn
new things.’

“And straight it overarched us with its plumes; which, then, down-
sweeping, bore us up to regions where my first guide had sunk, but for
the power that buoyed us, trembling, both.

“My eyes did wane, like moons eclipsed in overwhelming dawns: such
radiance was around; such vermeil light, born of no sun, but pervading
all the scene. Transparent, fleck-less, calm, all glowed one flame.

“Then said the greater guide This is the night of all ye here behold—
its day ye could not bide. Your utmost heaven is far below.’

“Abashed, smote down, I, quaking, upward gazed; where, to and fro, the
spirits sailed, like broad-winged crimson-dyed flamingos, spiraling in
sunset-clouds. But a sadness glorified, deep-fringed their mystic
temples, crowned with weeping halos, bird-like, floating o’er them,
whereso’er they roamed.

“Sights and odors blended. As when new-morning winds, in summer’s
prime, blow down from hanging gardens, wafting sweets that never pall;
so, from those flowery pinions, at every motion, came a flood of
fragrance.

“And now the spirits twain discoursed of things, whose very terms, to
me, were dark. But my first guide grew wise. For me, I could but
blankly list; yet comprehended naught; and, like the fish that’s mocked
with wings, and vainly seeks to fly;—again I sought my lower element.

“As poised, we hung in this rapt ether, a sudden trembling seized the
four wings now folding me. And afar of, in zones still upward reaching,
suns’ orbits off, I, tranced, beheld an awful glory. Sphere in sphere,
it burned:—the one Shekinah! The air was flaked with fire;—deep in
which, fell showers of silvery globes, tears magnified —braiding the
flame with rainbows. I heard a sound; but not for me, nor my first
guide, was that unutterable utterance. Then, my second guide was swept
aloft, as rises a cloud of red-dyed leaves in autumn whirlwinds.

“Fast clasping me, the other drooped, and, instant, sank, as in a
vacuum; myriad suns’ diameters in a breath;—my five senses merged in
one, of falling; till we gained the nether sky, descending still.

“Then strange things—soft, sad, and faint, I saw or heard; as, when, in
sunny, summer seas, down, down, you dive, starting at pensive phantoms,
that you can not fix.

“‘These,’ breathed my guide, ‘are spirits in their essences; sad, even
in undevelopment. With these, all space is peopled;—all the air is
vital with intelligence, which seeks embodiment. This it is, that
unbeknown to Mardians, causes them to strangely start in solitudes of
night, and in the fixed flood of their enchanted noons. From hence, are
formed your mortal souls; and all those sad and shadowy dreams, and
boundless thoughts man hath, are vague remembrances of the time when
the soul’s sad germ, wide wandered through these realms. And hence it
is, that when ye Mardians feel most sad, then ye feel most immortal.

“Like a spark new-struck from flint, soon Mardi showed afar. It glowed
within a sphere, which seemed, in space, a bubble, rising from vast
depths to the sea’s surface. Piercing it, my Mardian strength returned;
but the angel’s veins once more grew dim.

“Nearing the isles, thus breathed my guide:—‘Loved one, love on! But
know, that heaven hath no roof. To know all is to be all. Beatitude
there is none. And your only Mardian happiness is but exemption from
great woes—no more. Great Love is sad; and heaven is Love. Sadness
makes the silence throughout the realms of space; sadness is universal
and eternal; but sadness is tranquillity; tranquillity the uttermost
that souls may hope for.’

“Then, with its wings it fanned adieu; and disappeared where the sun
flames highest.”

We heard the dream and, silent, sought repose, to dream away our
wonder.




CHAPTER LXXXV.
They Depart From Serenia


At sunrise, we stood upon the beach.

Babbalanja thus:—“My voyage is ended. Not because what we sought is
found; but that I now possess all which may be had of what I sought in
Mardi. Here, tarry to grow wiser still:—then I am Alma’s and the
world’s. Taji! for Yillah thou wilt hunt in vain; she is a phantom that
but mocks thee; and while for her thou madly huntest, the sin thou
didst cries out, and its avengers still will follow. But here they may
not come: nor those, who, tempting, track thy path. Wise counsel take.
Within our hearts is all we seek: though in that search many need a
prompter. Him I have found in blessed Alma. Then rove no more. Gain
now, in flush of youth, that last wise thought, too often purchased, by
a life of woe. Be wise: be wise.

“Media! thy station calls thee home. Yet from this isle, thou earnest
that, wherewith to bless thy own. These flowers, that round us spring,
may be transplanted: and Odo made to bloom with amaranths and myrtles,
like this Serenia. Before thy people act the things, thou here hast
heard. Let no man weep, that thou may’st laugh; no man toil too hard,
that thou may’st idle be. Abdicate thy throne: but still retain the
scepter. None need a king; but many need a ruler.

“Mohi! Yoomy! do we part? then bury in forgetfulness much that hitherto
I’ve spoken. But let not one syllable of this old man’s words be lost.

“Mohi! Age leads thee by the hand. Live out thy life; and die, calm-
browed.

“But Yoomy! many days are thine. And in one life’s span, great circles
may be traversed, eternal good be done. Take all Mardi for thy home.
Nations are but names; and continents but shifting sands.

“Once more: Taji! be sure thy Yillah never will be found; or found,
will not avail thee. Yet search, if so thou wilt; more isles, thou
say’st, are still unvisited; and when all is seen, return, and find thy
Yillah here.

“Companions all! adieu.”

And from the beach, he wended through the woods.

Our shallops now refitted, we silently embarked; and as we sailed away,
the old man blessed us.

For a time, each prow’s ripplings were distinctly heard: ripple after
ripple.

With silent, steadfast eyes, Media still preserved his noble mien; Mohi
his reverend repose; Yoomy his musing mood.

But as a summer hurricane leaves all nature still, and smiling to the
eye; yet, in deep woods, there lie concealed some anguished roots torn
up:—so, with these.

Much they longed, to point our prows for Odo’s isle; saying our search
was over.

But I was fixed as fate.

On we sailed, as when we first embarked; the air was bracing as before.
More isles we visited:—thrice encountered the avengers: but unharmed;
thrice Hautia’s heralds but turned not aside;—saw many checkered
scenes—wandered through groves, and open fields—traversed many
vales—climbed hill-tops whence broad views were gained—tarried in
towns—broke into solitudes—sought far, sought near:—Still Yillah there
was none.

Then again they all would fain dissuade me.

“Closed is the deep blue eye,” said Yoomy.

“Fate’s last leaves are turning, let me home and die,” said Mohi.

“So nigh the circuit’s done,” said Media, “our morrow’s sun must rise
o’er Odo; Taji! renounce the hunt.”

“I am the hunter, that never rests! the hunter without a home! She I
seek, still flies before; and I will follow, though she lead me beyond
the reef; through sunless seas; and into night and death. Her, will I
seek, through all the isles and stars; and find her, whate’er betide!”

Again they yielded; and again we glided on;—our storm-worn prows, now
pointed here, now there;—beckoned, repulsed;—their half-rent sails,
still courting every breeze.

But that same night, once more, they wrestled with me. Now, at last,
the hopeless search must be renounced: Yillah there was none: back must
I hie to blue Serenia.

Then sweet Yillah called me from the sea;—still must I on! but gazing
whence that music seemed to come, I thought I saw the green corse
drifting by: and striking ’gainst our prow, as if to hinder. Then,
then! my heart grew hard, like flint; and black, like night; and
sounded hollow to the hand I clenched. Hyenas filled me with their
laughs; death-damps chilled my brow; I prayed not, but blasphemed.




CHAPTER LXXXVI.
They Meet The Phantoms


That starless midnight, there stole from out the darkness, the Iris
flag of Hautia.

Again the sirens came. They bore a large and stately urn-like flower,
white as alabaster, and glowing, as if lit up within. From its calyx,
flame-like, trembled forked and crimson stamens, burning with intensest
odors.

The phantoms nearer came; their flower, as an urn of burning niter.
Then it changed, and glowed like Persian dawns; or passive, was shot
over by palest lightnings;—so variable its tints.

“The night-blowing Cereus!” said Yoomy, shuddering, “that never blows
in sun-light; that blows but once; and blows but for an hour.—For the
last time I come; now, in your midnight of despair, and promise you
this glory. Take heed! short time hast thou to pause; through me,
perhaps, thy Yillah may be found.”

“Away! away! tempt me not by that, enchantress! Hautia! I know thee
not; I fear thee not; but instinct makes me hate thee. Away! my eyes
are frozen shut; I will not be tempted more.”

“How glorious it burns!” cried Media. I reel with incense:—can such
sweets be evil?”

“Look! look!” cried Yoomy, “its petals wane, and creep; one moment
more, and the night-flower shuts up forever the last, last hope of
Yillah!”

“Yillah! Yillah! Yillah!” bayed three vengeful voices far behind.

“Yillah! Yillah!—dash the urn! I follow, Hautia! though thy lure be
death.”

The Cereus closed; and in a mist the siren prow went on before; we,
following.

When day dawned, three radiant pilot-fish swam in advance: three
ravenous sharks astern.

And, full before us, rose the isle of Hautia.




CHAPTER LXXXVII.
They Draw Nigh To Flozella


As if Mardi were a poem, and every island a canto, the shore now in
sight was called Flozella-a-Nina, or The-Last-Verse-of-the-Song.

According to Mohi, the origin of this term was traceable to the
remotest antiquity.

In the beginning, there were other beings in Mardi besides Mardians;
winged beings, of purer minds, and cast in gentler molds, who would
fain have dwelt forever with mankind. But the hearts of the Mardians
were bitter against them, because of their superior goodness. Yet those
beings returned love for malice, and long entreated to virtue and
charity. But in the end, all Mardi rose up against them, and hunted
them from isle to isle; till, at last, they rose from the woodlands
like a flight of birds, and disappeared in the skies. Thereafter,
abandoned of such sweet influences, the Mardians fell into all manner
of sins and sufferings, becoming the erring things their descendants
were now. Yet they knew not, that their calamities were of their own
bringing down. For deemed a victory, the expulsion of the winged beings
was celebrated in choruses, throughout Mardi. And among other
jubilations, so ran the legend, a pean was composed, corresponding in
the number of its stanzas, to the number of islands. And a band of
youths, gayly appareled, voyaged in gala canoes all round the lagoon,
singing upon each isle, one verse of their song. And Flozella being the
last isle in their circuit, its queen commemorated the circumstance, by
new naming her realm.

That queen had first incited Mardi to wage war against the beings with
wings. She it was, who had been foremost in every assault. And that
queen was ancestor of Hautia, now ruling the isle.

Approaching the dominions of one who so long had haunted me,
conflicting emotions tore up my soul in tornadoes. Yet Hautia had held
out some prospect of crowning my yearnings. But how connected were
Hautia and Yillah? Something I hoped; yet more I feared. Dire
presentiments, like poisoned arrows, shot through me. Had they pierced
me before, straight to Flozella would I have voyaged; not waiting for
Hautia to woo me by that last and victorious temptation. But unchanged
remained my feelings of hatred for Hautia; yet vague those feelings, as
the language of her flowers. Nevertheless, in some mysterious way
seemed Hautia and Yillah connected. But Yillah was all beauty, and
innocence; my crown of felicity; my heaven below;—and Hautia, my whole
heart abhorred. Yillah I sought; Hautia sought me. One, openly beckoned
me here; the other dimly allured me there. Yet now was I wildly
dreaming to find them together. But so distracted my soul, I knew not
what it was, that I thought.

Slowly we neared the land. Flozella-a-Nina!—An omen? Was this isle,
then, to prove the last place of my search, even as it was the Last-
Verse-of-the-Song?




CHAPTER LXXXVIII.
They Land


A jeweled tiara, nodding in spray, looks flowery Flozella, approached
from the sea. For, lo you! the glittering foam all round its white
marge; where, forcing themselves underneath the coral ledge, and up
through its crevices, in fountains, the blue billows gush. While,
within, zone above zone, thrice zoned in belts of bloom, all the isle,
as a hanging-garden soars; its tapering cone blending aloft, with
heaven’s own blue.

“What flies through the spray! what incense is this?” cried Media.

“Ha! you wild breeze! you have been plundering the gardens of Hautia,”
cried Yoomy.

“No sweets can be sweeter,” said Braid-Beard, “but no Upas more
deadly.”

Anon we came nearer; sails idly flapping, and paddles suspended; sleek
currents our coursers. And round about the isle, like winged rainbows,
shoals of dolphins were leaping over floating fragments of wrecks:—
dark-green, long-haired ribs, and keels of canoes. For many shallops,
inveigled by the eddies, were oft dashed to pieces against that flowery
strand. But what cared the dolphins? Mardian wrecks were their homes.
Over and over they sprang: from east to west: rising and setting: many
suns in a moment; while all the sea, like a harvest plain, was stacked
with their glittering sheaves of spray.

And far down, fathoms on fathoms, flitted rainbow hues:—as seines- full
of mermaids; half-screening the bones of the drowned.

Swifter and swifter the currents now ran; till with a shock, our prows
were beached.

There, beneath an arch of spray, three dark-eyed maidens stood;
garlanded with columbines, their nectaries nodding like jesters’ bells;
and robed in vestments blue.

“The pilot-fish transformed!” cried Yoomy.

“The night-eyed heralds three!” said Mohi.

Following the maidens, we now took our way along a winding vale; where,
by sweet-scented hedges, flowed blue-braided brooks; their tributaries,
rivulets of violets, meandering through the meads.

On one hand, forever glowed the rosy mountains with a tropic dawn; and
on the other; lay an Arctic eve;—the white daisies drifted in long
banks of snow, and snowed the blossoms from the orange boughs. There,
summer breathed her bridal bloom; her hill-top temples crowned with
bridal wreaths.

We wandered on, through orchards arched in long arcades, that seemed
baronial halls, hung o’er with trophies:—so spread the boughs in
antlers. This orchard was the frontlet of the isle.

The fruit hung high in air, that only beaks, not hands, might pluck.

Here, the peach tree showed her thousand cheeks of down, kissed often
by the wooing winds; here, in swarms; the yellow apples hived, like
golden bees upon the boughs; here, from the kneeling, fainting trees,
thick fell the cherries, in great drops of blood; and here, the
pomegranate, with cold rind and sere, deep pierced by bills of birds
revealed the mellow of its ruddy core. So, oft the heart, that cold and
withered seems, within yet hides its juices.

This orchard passed, the vale became a lengthening plain, that seemed
the Straits of Ormus bared so thick it lay with flowery gems:
torquoise-hyacinths, ruby-roses, lily-pearls. Here roved the vagrant
vines; their flaxen ringlets curling over arbors, which laughed and
shook their golden locks. From bower to bower, flew the wee bird, that
ever hovering, seldom lights; and flights of gay canaries passed, like
jonquils, winged.

But now, from out half-hidden bowers of clematis, there issued swarms
of wasps, which flying wide, settled on all the buds.

And, fifty nymphs preceding, who now follows from those bowers, with
gliding, artful steps:—the very snares of love!—Hautia. A gorgeous
amaryllis in her hand; Circe-flowers in her ears; her girdle tied with
vervain.

She came by privet hedges, drooping; downcast honey-suckles; she trod
on pinks and pansies, blue-bells, heath, and lilies. She glided on: her
crescent brow calm as the moon, when most it works its evil influences.

Her eye was fathomless.

But the same mysterious, evil-boding gaze was there, which long before
had haunted me in Odo, ere Yillah fled.—Queen Hautia the incognito!
Then two wild currents met, and dashed me into foam.

“Yillah! Yillah!—tell me, queen!” But she stood motionless; radiant,
and scentless: a dahlia on its stalk. “Where? Where?”

“Is not thy voyage now ended?—Take flowers! Damsels, give him wine to
drink. After his weary hunt, be the wanderer happy.”

I dashed aside their cups, and flowers; still rang the vale with
Yillah!

“Taji! did I know her fate, naught would I now disclose; my heralds
pledged their queen to naught. Thou but comest here to supplant thy
mourner’s night-shade, with marriage roses. Damsels! give him wreaths;
crowd round him; press him with your cups!”

Once more I spilled their wine, and tore their garlands. Is not that,
the evil eye that long ago did haunt me? and thou, the Hautia who hast
followed me, and wooed, and mocked, and tempted me, through all this
long, long voyage? I swear! thou knowest all.”

“I am Hautia. Thou hast come at last. Crown him with your flowers!
Drown him in your wine! To all questions, Taji! I am mute.—Away!—
damsels dance; reel round him; round and round!”

Then, their feet made music on the rippling grass, like thousand leaves
of lilies on a lake. And, gliding nearer, Hautia welcomed Media; and
said, “Your comrade here is sad:—be ye gay. Ho, wine!—I pledge ye,
guests!”

Then, marking all, I thought to seem what I was not, that I might learn
at last the thing I sought.

So, three cups in hand I held; drank wine, and laughed; and half-way
met Queen Hautia’s blandishments.




CHAPTER LXXXIX.
They Enter The Bower Of Hautia


Conducted to the arbor, from which the queen had emerged, we came to a
sweet-brier bower within; and reclined upon odorous mats.

Then, in citron cups, sherbet of tamarinds was offered to Media, Mohi,
Yoomy; to me, a nautilus shell, brimmed with a light-like fluid, that
welled, and welled like a fount.

“Quaff, Taji, quaff! every drop drowns a thought!”

Like a blood-freshet, it ran through my veins.

A philter?—How Hautia burned before me! Glorious queen! with all the
radiance, lighting up the equatorial night.

“Thou art most magical, oh queen! about thee a thousand constellations
cluster.”

“They blaze to burn,” whispered Mohi.

“I see ten million Hautias!—all space reflects her, as a mirror.”

Then, in reels, the damsels once more mazed, the blossoms shaking from
their brows; till Hautia, glided near; arms lustrous as rainbows:
chanting some wild invocation.

My soul ebbed out; Yillah there was none! but as I turned round open-
armed, Hautia vanished.

“She is deeper than the sea,” said Media.

“Her bow is bent,” said Yoomy.

“I could tell wonders of Hautia and her damsels,” said Mohi.

“What wonders?”

“Listen; and in his own words will I recount the adventure of the youth
Ozonna. It will show thee, Taji, that the maidens of Hautia are all
Yillahs, held captive, unknown to themselves; and that Hautia, their
enchantress, is the most treacherous of queens.

“‘Camel-like, laden with woe,’ said Ozonna, ‘after many wild rovings in
quest of a maiden long lost—beautiful Ady! and after being repelled in
Maramma; and in vain hailed to land at Serenia, represented as naught
but another Maramma;—with vague promises of discovering Ady, three
sirens, who long had pursued, at last inveigled me to Flozella; where
Hautia made me her thrall. But ere long, in Rea, one of her maidens, I
thought I discovered my Ady transformed. My arms opened wide to
embrace; but the damsel knew not Ozonna. And even, when after hard
wooing, I won her again, she seemed not lost Ady, but Rea. Yet all the
while, from deep in her strange, black orbs, Ady’s blue eyes seemed
pensively looking:—blue eye within black: sad, silent soul within
merry. Long I strove, by fixed ardent gazing, to break the spell, and
restore in Rea my lost one’s Past. But in vain. It was only Rea, not
Ady, who at stolen intervals looked on me now. One morning Hautia
started as she greeted me; her quick eye rested on my bosom; and
glancing there, affrighted, I beheld a distinct, fresh mark, the
impress of Rea’s necklace drop. Fleeing, I revealed what had passed to
the maiden, who broke from my side; as I, from Hautia’s. The queen
summoned her damsels, but for many hours the call was unheeded; and
when at last they came, upon each bosom lay a necklace-drop like Rea’s.
On the morrow, lo! my arbor was strown over with bruised Linden-leaves,
exuding a vernal juice. Full of forbodings, again I sought Rea: who,
casting down her eyes, beheld her feet stained green. Again she fled;
and again Hautia summoned her damsels: malicious triumph in her eye;
but dismay succeeded: each maid had spotted feet. That night Rea was
torn from my side by three masks; who, stifling her cries, rapidly bore
her away; and as I pursued, disappeared in a cave. Next morning, Hautia
was surrounded by her nymphs, but Rea was absent. Then, gliding near,
she snatched from my hair, a jet-black tress, loose-hanging. ‘Ozonna is
the murderer! See! Rea’s torn hair entangled with his!’ Aghast, I swore
that I knew not her fate. ‘Then let the witch Larfee be called!’ The
maidens darted from the bower; and soon after, there rolled into it a
green cocoa-nut, followed by the witch, and all the damsels, flinging
anemones upon it. Bowling this way and that, the nut at last rolled to
my feet.—‘It is he!’ cried all.—Then they bound me with osiers; and at
midnight, unseen and irresistible hands placed me in a shallop; which
sped far out into the lagoon, where they tossed me to the waves; but so
violent the shock, the osiers burst; and as the shallop fled one way,
swimming another, ere long I gained land.

“‘Thus in Flozella, I found but the phantom of Ady, and slew the last
hope of Ady the true.’”

This recital sank deep into my soul. In some wild way, Hautia had made
a captive of Yillah; in some one of her black-eyed maids, the blue-eyed
One was transformed. From side to side, in frenzy, I turned; but in all
those cold, mystical eyes, saw not the warm ray that I sought.

“Hast taken root within this treacherous soil?” cried Media. “Away! thy
Yillah is behind thee, not before. Deep she dwells in blue Serenia’s
groves; which thou would’st not search. Hautia mocks thee; away! The
reef is rounded; but a strait flows between this isle and Odo, and
thither its ruler must return. Every hour I tarry here, some wretched
serf is dying there, for whom, from blest Serenia, _I carry life and
joy. Away!_”

“Art still bent on finding evil for thy good?” cried Mohi.—“How can
Yillah harbor here?—Beware!—Let not Hautia so enthrall thee.”

“Come away, come away,” cried Yoomy. “Far hence is Yillah! and he who
tarries among these flowers, must needs burn juniper.”

“Look on me, Media, Mohi, Yoomy. Here I stand, my own monument, till
Hautia breaks the spell.”

In grief they left me.

Vee-Vee’s conch I heard no more.




CHAPTER XC.
Taji With Hautia


As their last echoes died away down the valley, Hautia glided near;—
zone unbound, the amaryllis in her hand. Her bosom ebbed and flowed;
the motes danced in the beams that darted from her eyes.

“Come! let us sin, and be merry. Ho! wine, wine, wine! and lapfuls of
flowers! let all the cane-brakes pipe their flutes. Damsels! dance;
reel, swim, around me:—I, the vortex that draws all in. Taji! Taji!— as
a berry, that name is juicy in my mouth!—Taji, Taji!” and in choruses,
she warbled forth the sound, till it seemed issuing from her syren
eyes.

My heart flew forth from out its bars, and soared in air; but as my
hand touched Hautia’s, down dropped a dead bird from the clouds.

“Ha! how he sinks!—but did’st ever dive in deep waters, Taji? Did’st
ever see where pearls grow?—To the cave!—damsels, lead on!”

Then wending through constellations of flowers, we entered deep groves.
And thus, thrice from sun-light to shade, it seemed three brief nights
and days, ere we paused before the mouth of the cavern.

A bow-shot from the sea, it pierced the hill-side like a vaulted way;
and glancing in, we saw far gleams of water; crossed, here and there,
by long-flung distant shadows of domes and columns. All Venice seemed
within.

From a stack of golden palm-stalks, the damsels now made torches; then
stood grouped; a sheaf of sirens in a sheaf of frame.

Illuminated, the cavern shone like a Queen of Kandy’s casket: full of
dawns and sunsets.

From rocky roof to bubbling floor, it was columned with stalactites;
and galleried all round, in spiral tiers, with sparkling, coral ledges.

And now, their torches held aloft, into the water the maidens softly
glided; and each a lotus floated; while, from far above, into the air
Hautia flung her flambeau; then bounding after, in the lake, two
meteors were quenched.

Where she dived, the flambeaux clustered; and up among them, Hautia
rose; hands, full of pearls.

“Lo! Taji; all these may be had for the diving; and Beauty, Health,
Wealth, Long Life, and the Last Lost Hope of man. But through me alone,
may these be had. Dive thou, and bring up one pearl if thou canst.”

Down, down! down, down, in the clear, sparkling water, till I seemed
crystalized in the flashing heart of a diamond; but from those
bottomless depths, I uprose empty handed.

“Pearls, pearls! thy pearls! thou art fresh from the mines. Ah, Taji!
for thee, bootless deep diving. Yet to Hautia, one shallow plunge
reveals many Golcondas. But come; dive with me:—join hands—let me show
thee strange things.”

“Show me that which I seek, and I will dive with thee, straight through
the world, till we come up in oceans unknown.”

“Nay, nay; but join hands, and I will take thee, where thy Past shall
be forgotten; where thou wilt soon learn to love the living, not the
dead.”

“Better to me, oh Hautia! all the bitterness of my buried dead, than
all the sweets of the life thou canst bestow; even, were it eternal.”




CHAPTER XCI.
Mardi Behind: An Ocean Before


Returned from the cave, Hautia reclined in her clematis bower,
invisible hands flinging fennel around her. And nearer, and nearer,
stole dulcet sounds dissolving my woes, as warm beams, snow. Strange
languors made me droop; once more within my inmost vault, side by side,
the Past and Yillah lay:—two bodies tranced;—while like a rounding sun,
before me Hautia magnified magnificence; and through her fixed eyes,
slowly drank up my soul.

Thus we stood:—snake and victim: life ebbing out from me, to her.

But from that spell, I burst again, as all the Past smote all the
Present in me.

“Oh Hautia! thou knowest the mystery I die to fathom. I see it
crouching in thine eye:—Reveal!”

“Weal or woe?”

“Life or death!”

“See, see!” and Yillah’s rose-pearl danced before me.

I snatched it from her hand:—“Yillah! Yillah!”

“Rave on: she lies too deep to answer; stranger voices than thine she
hears:—bubbles are bursting round her.”

“Drowned! drowned then, even as she dreamed:—I come, I come!—Ha, what
form is this?—hast mosses? sea-thyme? pearls?—Help, help! I sink!—Back,
shining monster!—-What, Hautia,—is it thou?—Oh vipress, I could slay
thee!”

“Go, go,—and slay thyself: I may not make thee mine;—go,—dead to
dead!—There is another cavern in the hill.” Swift I fled along the
valley-side; passed Hautia’s cave of pearls; and gained a twilight
arch; within, a lake transparent shone. Conflicting currents met, and
wrestled; and one dark arch led to channels, seaward tending.

Round and round, a gleaming form slow circled in the deepest eddies:—
white, and vaguely Yillah.

Straight I plunged; but the currents were as fierce headwinds off
capes, that beat back ships.

Then, as I frenzied gazed; gaining the one dark arch, the revolving
shade darted out of sight, and the eddies whirled as before.

“Stay, stay! let me go with thee, though thou glidest to gulfs of
blackness;—naught can exceed the hell of this despair!—Why beat longer
in this corpse oh, my heart!”

As somnambulists fast-frozen in some horrid dream, ghost-like glide
abroad, and fright the wakeful world; so that night, with death-glazed
eyes, to and fro I flitted on the damp and weedy beach.

“Is this specter, Taji?”—and Mohi and the minstrel stood before me.

“Taji lives no more. So dead, he has no ghost. I am his spirit’s
phantom’s phantom.”

“Nay, then, phantom! the time has come to flee.”

They dragged me to the water’s brink, where a prow was beached. Soon—
Mohi at the helm—we shot beneath the far-flung shadow of a cliff; when,
as in a dream, I hearkened to a voice.

Arrived at Odo, Media had been met with yells. Sedition was in arms,
and to his beard defied him. Vain all concessions then. Foremost stood
the three pale sons of him, whom I had slain, to gain the maiden lost.
Avengers, from the first hour we had parted on the sea, they had
drifted on my track survived starvation; and lived to hunt me round all
Mardi’s reef; and now at Odo, that last threshold, waited to destroy;
or there, missing the revenge they sought, still swore to hunt me round
Eternity.

Behind the avengers, raged a stormy mob, invoking Media to renounce his
rule. But one hand waving like a pennant above the smoke of some
sea-fight, straight through that tumult Media sailed serene: the
rioters parting from before him, as wild waves before a prow
inflexible.

A haven gained, he turned to Mohi and the minstrel:—“Oh, friends! after
our long companionship, hard to part! But henceforth, for many moons,
Odo will prove no home for old age, or youth. In Serenia only, will ye
find the peace ye seek; and thither ye must carry Taji, who else must
soon be slain, or lost. Go: release him from the thrall of Hautia.
Outfly the avengers, and gain Serenia. Reek not of me. The state is
tossed in storms; and where I stand, the combing billows must break
over. But among all noble souls, in tempest-time, the headmost man last
flies the wreck. So, here in Odo will I abide, though every plank
breaks up beneath me. And then,—great Oro! let the king die clinging to
the keel! Farewell!”

Such Mohi’s tale.

In trumpet-blasts, the hoarse night-winds now blew; the Lagoon, black
with the still shadows of the mountains, and the driving shadows of the
clouds. Of all the stars, only red Arcturus shone. But through the
gloom, and on the circumvallating reef, the breakers dashed
ghost-white.

An outlet in that outer barrier was nigh.

“Ah! Yillah! Yillah!—the currents sweep thee ocean-ward; nor will I
tarry behind.—Mardi, farewell!—Give me the helm, old man!”

“Nay, madman! Serenia is our haven. Through yonder strait, for thee,
perdition lies. And from the deep beyond, no voyager e’er puts back.”

“And why put back? is a life of dying worth living o’er again?—Let
_me_, then, be the unreturning wanderer. The helm! By Oro, I will steer
my own fate, old man.—Mardi, farewell!”

“Nay, Taji: commit not the last, last crime!” cried Yoomy.

“He’s seized the helm! eternity is in his eye! Yoomy: for our lives we
must now swim.”

And plunging, they struck out for land: Yoomy buoying Mohi up, and the
salt waves dashing the tears from his pallid face, as through the scud,
he turned it on me mournfully.

“Now, I am my own soul’s emperor; and my first act is abdication! Hail!
realm of shades!”—and turning my prow into the racing tide, which
seized me like a hand omnipotent, I darted through.

Churned in foam, that outer ocean lashed the clouds; and straight in my
white wake, headlong dashed a shallop, three fixed specters leaning
o’er its prow: three arrows poising.

And thus, pursuers and pursued flew on, over an endless sea.

THE END

